What are our expectations?
Which of the things we desire are within reach?
If not now, when?
And will there be some left for me?
♪ I took a walk through this beautiful world ♪
♪ felt the cool rain on my shoulder ♪
♪ found something good in this beautiful world ♪
♪ I felt the rain getting colder ♪
♪ sha la la la la
♪ sha la la la la la
♪ sha la la la la
♪ sha la la la la la la
China's younger generation is driving a growth in consumption.
This is where the real power is.
China.
If you live in Manhattan like
I do and you think you live in the center of the world, this place, Shanghai, will confront you with a very different reality.
Turn down a side street, it's an ancient culture.
Centuries old mix of culinary traditions, smells, flavors, a block away, this.
An ultramodern ever clanging cash register, levels of wealth, luxury, sheer volume of things and services unimagined by the greediest, most of capitalist imperialists.
The city is split by the river, a tributary of the yank sea in the oldest section which features the newer built up section.
The one thing I know for sure about China is I will never know China.
It's too big, too old, too diverse, too deep.
There's simply not enough time.
That's for me, the joy of China.
Facing a learning curve that impossibly steep.
The certain knowledge that even if I dedicated my life to learning about China, I'd die mostly ignorant.
That's exciting.
It's too much.
And it's changing.
So fast.
China has a population of around
$1.3 billion people, and the number of them who are joining an explosive middle class demanding their share of all that good stuff, infrastructure, the clothes, the cars, the gas, the fuel, is well, it's the engine that might well drive the whole world.
Very much, yes.
Okay, what do you want?
Order, of course, some good dumplings.
The professor is an economist and the current Dean of the college of economics and management that
Shanghai university.
Like so many people you meet here, he's Chinese, but was educated in American universities and taught at Yale,
Duke, and Arizona state.
Forgive me, economics are not my area of expertise, I wallow in ignorance, but China looks different every time I come.
It's changing so, so, so quickly, how did that happen?
China, enjoyed this long period of peace, no serious enemy.
No major wars.
Right.
So the manufacturing industry really took off.
Internally, formed an open door policy.
Every country willing to trade with China.
There's certainly no doubt that at this point, we are, our destinies are inextricably bound up, our economies are hope legislationly interming med, if one fails, the effect would be disastrous.
Global impact.
We are, to say the least.
It's certainly... beautiful.
This is what I was waiting for.
Literally small steaming basket buns.
But I translate them in my head to pillows of happiness that will scald your tongue and throat if you don't know what you're doing.
Look, there are a lot of reasons to come to China and Shanghai in particular, but these babies, done right, these things alone are worth the trip.
Ground pork and shrimp, folded exactly and always 20 times inside freshly made individually rolled out dough.
As their steamed a delicious, delicious fat renders into the soup of the gods, which then if you're not careful, causes unforgettable damage as it changes your life forever.
So good.
In the China of the future, places like this will be even more packed by Chinese, by expats, by visitors looking for the deeply satisfying rush of screamingly hot goodness.
The chewy, deeply savory, fragrant, perfectly shaped and folded ballistically designed vehicles for pure pleasure.
And the allure of Shanghai's style pork chop, served with the local take on Worcestershire sauce.
It's unbelievable.
I really believe the word is con verget, and China will again be privatizing more and more, but the difficulty, nowadays, it's just, the technology is so advanced, we don't really meet that many people to do things that many people used to do.
In which the population, seven billion people, probably doesn't need that many people working anymore.
Right.
So the question is, what should human beings do?
You know.
How can you let them not doing anything, and they're still living a good life?
Right.
I don't know.
It's going to be a big issue that can face the whole world.
What is the future?
I don't know.
But to a very great extent, it is surely being determined here.
Is there a plan?
Probably not.
Only appetites.
And increasingly, the means to fulfill those appetites.
Those dreams and aspirations.
Who will drive the car that takes us to wherever we are going?
They will be young, whoever they are.
And not unlike yow, a
30-year-old Shanghai native ejtsed in the USA, current lay feature's reporter for the Shanghai daily.
She may be the picture of modern
China, but this is her favorite restaurant.
China and Shanghai in particular might be transforming fast, but this place stays resolutely the same.
She runs the place, serving classic, home style food.
There's no menu, no waiting list.
And you only get a seat if she likes you.
I ordered too much, sorry.
Fantastic.
Very happy.
We're joined by her friend,
Lu an artist, and
Matthew, a restauranteur.
How do you eat these?
Whole.
I eat them whole because
I really like this.
That works.
Oh, they're good.
I think they cook a few seconds.
They are tiny little shrimp, deep fried first and quicklies toed in the wok with garlic, ginger, salt, and soy.
What is classic Shanghai food?
What's distinctive about it?
Well this frinz, it's often...
Friends, it's... for instance, it's often black, and dark.
It has been for some time a city of immigrants.
The food reflects that genealogy.
A combination of people from the province known for soy and vinegar, and others known for fresh ingredients and attention to preserving the aliveness of its dishes.
It's the best of both worlds.
Great sauces, great ingredients.
There's braised pork belly in a deep red glaze of dark and light soy sauce, cinnamon, sugar, and annise.
A small fish poached first in rice wine, salt and light soy, then fried in ginger garlic oil, more soy and sugar until it's reduced into a gorgeous sticky sauce.
Duck that's been marinated, blanched, then reheated, smothered in a sauce made from the reduced drippings left in the wok with dark soy, salt, and sugar.
And this to round things out, a
Clay pot soup of bean curd based stock with salted pork belly, tofu ribbons, and bamboo chutes.
Oh good flavor.
This is a socialist country, supposedly.
Yep.
But it's a communist country, supposedly.
It is in fact from evidence that
I've seen, the most dynamic capitalist country on earth.
What do you think about that?
I think a lot of my western friends come here thinking China is a version of North Korea or the party controls everything, but they come here, they are surprised, it's actually not that much.
They do seem to be promoting the free market even more with the free trade zone, just established in Shanghai.
It's amazing.
From what I see, everywhere we go, more Chinese, Chinese influence, Chinese food, if you build a casino in Vegas or a hotel in Singapore, you have to consider what will the Chinese think, is that exciting?
It's exciting that we finally have a thing that we wouldn't.
China is sort of in a spotlight in the central, we wouldn't have dreamed of, like say only a decade ago.
For me, I think, you know, the communist menace that we always used to talk about in
America, I think the most terrifying scenario is that
China becomes a completely free market, non-socialist, non-communist society because you'd bury us.
I love few things more than quoting that impeccable communist Deng Sho Peng to be rich is glorious.
All isms are Wasims.
Dig deep, and it's always about the money.
Meet Tim Si.
Resident of communist China, man of impeccable taste, one of more than 150,000 Shanghainese millionaires accustomed to the good life.
Take the sea water out, we place with champagne.
Have it only once.
Hopefully you like it.
He likes nice things.
And he makes Donald Trump's ticky tacky empire look like the back of Pauly D.'S Van.
Where are these from?
They're great.
France.
France, fantastic.
Good shape.
I keep them happy.
Every single one is flown from jet so they're nice and happy and safe.
Apparently.
Tim is an investor into real estate, telecoms, and the newly expanding service industries of the new China.
He's also the president of
Roosevelt China investments, a very old company with a long history doing business here.
Created by the Roosevelt family, maybe you've heard of them.
This is his clubhouse, really, the house of Roosevelt right in the middle of it all.
Wine is big here now.
The French chateaus more and more they look to China as the indicators of price as the market maker.
Tim alone has stocked around 4,000 labels here.
China in general bought two billion bottles of red wine last year alone.
Think about that for a minute.
They are now the leading market for red wine in the world.
It's pretty amazing here.
I designed this place in five minutes.
I look at this place like six months... uh-huh.
Daytime, nighttime, and finally one morning, I said, I'm going to make a wine cellar out of this.
It looks so good.
Thank you.
This is nice.
Hi.
Tim invited me to dinner alongside of people who have taken full advantage of the booming economy.
Daniel, a real estate developer, and cocoa, a party planner.
You eat like this all the time?
Nice wine cellar.
Twice a night.
Today we're surrounded by
Southern French wine, and
Italian wine.
And if you like it, you can drink from wine country every night.
Isn't this supposed to be communist China?
I mean, it seems like... can
I ask one question, any one of the communist party comrades party member?
No.
I'm a bit of a red diaper baby.
What I mean to say, it just seems that the realm of the possible here is very big.
Absolutely.
It's a big stage.
I mean, in New York City, you can see that, and why a massive party.
That's probably the only one in the whole city.
There's tenth massive parties going on, and there's ten more coming up in the next couple of years.
It's a big city, but small village at the end.
And I think food is the best weapons on earth to make peace.
It's the food.
It's the drink.
We have better peace on earth.
And you probably the united nation ambassador.
In time.
From south pole.
Only New Zealand has found them.
Try it, wasabi if you'd like.
A lot of Chinese restaurant in New York...
I grew up in the 50s and 60s, even then, Chinese restaurant,
Chinese food was really an essential part of being a new yorker.
I mean if you don't know thousand use chop sticks as a new yorker, you were a terrible new yorker.
I'll ask one thing, you know how to speak like a
Brooklyn person?
It's a tough accent.
Queens is easier, it's more of a, I can't, I mean, I live right next to it my whole life.
We don't want to hear it.
I just to want hear not for nothing.
What?
Not for nothing.
That's Brooklyn.
Not for nothing.
Not for nothing, but I could use a little more wine.
There.
Not for nothing.
Nothing, nothing.
Not for nothing.
Not for nothing.
All right.
Shanghai chef prepares a meal of a style that will become without a doubt more and more typical and in demand here among those who can afford it.
And more and more people every day can afford it.
What is it?
We have tomato and potato, and that's it.
What else do we have?
Australian beef, a massive, perfectly cooked Tom hawk chop,
$150 a pound, that includes bones and fat.
This is about a thousand dollars worth of steak.
Even if Tim wanted to serve good old USA beef, still the finest on earth in my opinion, he can't.
China has banned imports over concerns of mad cow disease.
While they carve, the quick trip behind the bookshelf.
Now I want to show you the best place.
Wow.
So you name, your label, the village of wines.
There's a chance we have it.
And so this size is our interesting wine that they can keep ageing themselves.
This is the house collection.
That's correct.
Right.
And I want to show you the membership area.
The newest member,
Anthony Bourdain.
Me?
And it's all our collection of wriens, please, open it.
Ah.
Well, cool.
It's good being the... thank you.
Thank you so much.
Close that up, man.
Close it up.
Here's the thing, even with the modern China rising out of the ground all around you, even with all the things the same things you see for sale everywhere where people have money these days, even with all that, there's still this China.
Shoning road, just south of people's square.
It's still happening.
The good old stuff.
The China you first fell in love with.
Walk down the street and look in any direction, and there's something to eat.
I may not know what it is immediately, but chances are, it's good.
We talk about foodies and what does that mean?
By current definition, best I can understand it, that makes just about every Chinese person
I ever laid eyes on a foodie.
Which is to say a perfectly reasonable person who enjoys and pays attention to where the good stuff is.
Look at this.
One street, and look, stuffed oysters grilled over charcoal.
Snake bits, why yes.
And yes, it does taste kind of like chicken.
There used to be a lot of streets like this full of it where you could look, shop around, then eat all out in the open.
Happy, delicious torrent of food, but the government, as governments do, are tightening the screws.
Old is bad, new is good.
Not everybody thinks this is a good idea though.
Bill Wang was born in Shanghai and studied here at the university.
He began teaching English before he was out of college.
He suggested we meet, and there may be stalls all over Shanghai, but bill says this one, this one is the one.
So you're an English teacher?
Yes, yes.
Most of the people I meet of
Chinese background who speak
English have, their teachers were British, sometimes
Australian, or New Zealand.
Younger generation, there's more of that sort of TV accent.
Is that good or bad?
I think it's good.
You know, TV series, especially
American TV series are so popular in China.
What are the most popular?
Right now, house of cards.
House of cards.
Yeah.
So popular.
House of card.
That's really interesting, what do you think the appeal is here?
You know, in the show,
American, they talk about president, in China there's no way you can talk about those sensitive topics.
So many people love that show, it's really, really good.
Wow, that's really a surprise to me.
Wow.
This is huge.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yum, good.
Is it good?
Uh-huh.
Minced pork, ginger, moistened with rice wine, soy, it all gets mixed up nicely and folded into the dough.
Boiled until just right and sauced with soy sauce, vinegar, sesame oil, and peanut butter.
You have a sweet, savory thing going on with every bite.
You want this.
Believe me, you want this bad.
In fact, you need it.
What do your students want to do when they enter the professional field?
What's the dream?
I think this generation, there are a lot of them are lost.
They don't know what to do.
If you ask like the university, what is the dream?
Right.
Buy an apartment in Shanghai, buy a car, you know, that kinds of things.
Are there enough jobs for everybody?
It's becoming more and more competitive.
Right.
Everybody wants the best job, so many very few of them out there.
But I think there's like a huge gap between company and new graduates.
Right.
Company wants experienced workers.
Right.
New graduates also want a good job.
Now.
Yeah, now.
They are not ready for it.
Right.
They don't want to do some, you know, hard work, start from scratch.
Right.
So that's the problem.
It looks to me, China in general, Shanghai in particular, is changing very, very fast.
Very, very fast.
Every time I come, it's different.
And in your recent memory, in the last ten years, what's the most noticeable change to you?
Food like this.
It's becoming more and more difficult to find.
This is handmade.
And I think this is real food.
It's not very expensive, and it tastes great, but a lot of food, you know, processed food right now.
And also, of course Internet.
It has pros and cons, the good part is that you can get information easily.
Right.
That part is people don't talk to each other, that's bad.
People go to a restaurant, you know, like a couple, they take pictures, and use their cell phone, they don't talk to each other.
They're communicating with everybody else in the world except who's at the table.
What's the point.
It didn't happen until you tweeted, as we say.
Oh my gosh.
What's clear very quickly here is the way China claims things are the way they're supposed to be, and the way they actually are, two different things.
Meet Thomas you.
Hacker turned entrepreneur.
He recently received significant startup money to build what he calls an open source project sharing platform.
To connect Chinese college students with the world.
When you say hacking, what is, what do you do when you hack?
What's the intent?
Actually, it starts from MIT.
If you go to the computer science and artificial intelligence building, MIT, it will show you the definition of hack.
It's actually a very positive word that's been in a negative word.
One hacker is people who are really, they really like programming, and they love to share information.
Just like cooking.
You love to share recipes to other friend for a lot of cooking.
Legally, there might be something wrong with it, but morally do you think there's anything wrong with you're essentially breaking into an information base.
I'm not doing any damage, I'm going to look around, see how things work, and I'll leave without disturbing anything.
Would most hackers say that that's okay?
Yes.
Yes.
It's in the service of knowledge.
It's okay for most of the hackers in our communities.
I was lucky, I got into a big hacker community here in shank lie and met great mentors.
Started in business in 21.
I did.
Great accomplishment.
You didn't go to college?
I didn't.
Why not?
The country is so advanced in so many other ways, why in this area?
Network problem here in
China, we have GFW, it blocks a lot of important information websites.
And a lot of people, we can't use in college at all.
And so the human resource problem and power problem is getting more and more serious here in China.
Because everyone's going to silicon valley?
They offer better, obviously.
These are the famous ribs?
Yes.
Maybe the number one thing that the seriously food crazed traveler coming back from
Shanghai will tell you to eat, other than the soup dumplings of course, ribs.
It takes two cooks working at once to make this dish.
One deep fries the ribs in hot oil until just right.
Another toasts the ginger, cumin, and other spices in a wok.
And then, in go the ribs.
And if you're devoted of what's called wok, you sit as close as possible to capture that elusive, fast dissipating breath, flavor of the wok itself.
Toss them around coating those bones with all that good stuff, then serve.
And because we like it to burn,
Thomas orders some spicy chicken dish.
Hey means energy, light force, or breath, and that's what you're looking for of the flavor, the essence of a very old, carefully seasoned cooking vessel.
Oddly enough, Thomas tells me there's no mandarin or at least
Shanghainese work for wok, it's simply called a cooking pot.
To which I say I really do know nothing about this country.
Fantastic.
Wow.
Yeah.
I love that.
Not too good.
Not bad.
To me, and I've eat an lot of food, this is spicy, fresh, bright, vibrant...
I will take you somewhere better.
So are you a foodie?
Yeah, I eat a lot.
Were you born here, in Shanghai?
Yeah.
At least in modern times, it's hard to imagine that any place has changed as profoundly and changing as quickly as it is changing here.
We feel very proud.
We really feel proud.
Our qualities of life is improving really, really faster.
In a poll, 85% of Chinese who were asked the question, do you feel that your life will be better next year?
85% said yes, it will be better next year.
This is an extraordinary number.
Yeah.
I don't know a lot of other countries that would say that.
Yeah.
Well that looks great.
Famous chicken.
So good.
Not bad.
You know, I'm finding this food really, really delicious.
And you're saying it's just... it's so-so.
Wow.
Shanghai is one of the biggest cities in the world right now.
A global financial center and transportation hub and the world's busiest port.
You can smell the money.
But maybe the real story is the newly emerging participants in global capitalism.
The middle class.
The working class.
Who also want flat screen TVs and cars, and vacations, and the promise of better for their kids.
Take this couple, typical working class Chinese from the worker's paradise.
Mei, a bus driver, and
Don, his bride to be.
Today is their wedding day.
And custom must be observed.
When it comes to weddings, the
Chinese have always gone big, and these days, bigger still.
Lots of food, lots of booze, lots of people.
Getting crazy.
Which is why Thomas and I have become wedding crashers.
The constellation bar for a prewedding drink.
The classic Chinese cocktail, the Moscow mule.
Okay, maybe not Chinese.
These are good.
Yeah.
This is the reason why
I love this place.
Are you married?
No.
Not yet.
I'm not a big fan of marriage.
You've been to weddings, yes?
Yes.
Have you ever crashed a wedding before?
No.
It's going to be a little weird.
I mean, we don't know anybody there.
How do you do?
Well, I hope the food's good that the thing.
You probably have a lot of drinks.
Could be really crazy.
Oh really?
Yeah.
Uh-oh.
Drink a lot.
Really?
So, ready to crash a wedding?
Yeah, let's do it.
All right.
Yeah.
The Chinese wedding is not cheap.
You need a banquet room, in this case the families rented out this place at the historic park hotel Shanghai.
Chinese weddings generally speaking, mean the presence of a number of formalities.
First, meet the bride and groom upon entering.
Red envelope, also known as the hung bow, like in good fellas, it's a little something for the bride and groom.
Help them get started in their new life.
Thank you.
Okay.
Table setting.
Often with some must-haves present.
Booze, whisky, smokes for the guests.
So this is kind of like a traditional Chinese wedding.
Oh, I know, I do this every week.
Hotel to hotel, and
I crash weddings.
Okay.
Roast duck, that I will have, of course, and some beef fried ♪ kona crab, shelled and then sauted in garlic and ginger before being stuffed back into the shell.
Steamed turbo with scallions.
A wedding in China, have this kind of meal for whole two days, whole weekend.
See, I'm telling you, we should do this every week.
I'm going to come back, I'm going to move to Shanghai.
And you and me, twice a week, we'll just go to weddings.
[ Cheers and app
You may kiss the bride.
And there is, of course, drinking.
Much drinking.
She wants to share with you.
Oh.
Again.
When I first came to China, it was for business, and one after the other.
Everyone at the table came up and said, ah, Mr. Bourdain, I would like to do a drink with you.
And then, all of it.
I didn't know how to politely say no.
I can't, I can't.
I just kept doing it and doing it.
I got super [ Bleep ] up.
I ended up going like to karaoke.
I ended up singing a Billy idol song, I think I sang
"white wedding."
Making it a personal mission to get me seriously drunk.
I'm just wondering how you got out of that.
When I sat down and I looked around the table and I tried to figure out, who at this table is going to try really hard to get me drunk?
I wouldn't have guessed it was going to be her.
Drinking this white wine all day long.
I don't drink a lot, just a taste.
We have to get this straight.
That is not wine.
That's like grain alcohol.
That's what we call liquor.
Okay, so we're clear on that.
Now, this is a small wedding by most standards.
About a hundred guests.
But just booking the room took two years.
A toast, followed by many more toasts, to the bride, to the groom, to happiness, to prosperity.
There is a place.
There is always a place where something delicious in a bowl is waiting just for you.
Down a street, down an alley, there's a place like this one, where locals will tell you, the good stuff lives.
They call this stuff long-leg noodles.
Because they say the woman who runs it is tall.
Noodles for me are a solitary pleasure, between me and my bowl.
Fen Li and her husband Wong understand this, I think.
Now, this is a deceptively good business.
What used tab a typical, low-cost working stall of the street variety has in fact blown up.
Along with the rest of the economy.
Rich kids and TV guys like me want to eat here.
And they do.
How do you make a bowl of perfect happiness?
Cook noodles in boiling water, flavored with chiles and lard.
Immerse your noodles in a soy bath of deeply sinister pork stock.
A little bit of bock choi, heat for a few seconds, simmering, and garnish with a slowly cooked, heavily reduced, almost candied pork.
Then suck those noodles loudly.
And enjoy.
Where are we going?
Who will drive us there?
What will it be like when we get there?
I think it will look like this.
