This is where I bought my first bag of heroin.
It was 1980, I was 24 years old.
But in a lot of ways, my whole life up to that point was leading to this address.
Western Massachusetts, the unlikely new frontier of
America's war on drugs.
Where heroin has become an exploding problem that's begun to touch nearly every family.
♪ I took a walk through this beautiful world ♪
♪ felt the cool rain on my shoulder ♪
♪ found something good in this beautiful world ♪
♪ I felt the rain getting colder ♪
♪ sha, la, la, la, la
♪ sha, la, la, la, la
♪ sha, la, la, la, la, la
♪ sha, la, la, la, la, la
There's nothing like the north Atlantic.
It's majestic.
I love the beach.
Pretty much had my first everything on a beach.
You name, first time
I did it, beach.
I was miserable in love, happy in love, alternately, as only a 17-year-old could be.
This is where I lived.
Very happy summer in the early
'70s, and that was my room on the left.
It's an amazing spot if you think about it, a bunch of knuckle heads working as dish washers, way or its, beach servers.
We could work on a beach like this.
Happier, stupider times.
You know, I can still hear the play list, the brothers Johnson.
If you put on Marvin Gaye right now, I'd burst into tears.
What do you do?
You're young, you go to the beach, you get laid, and you get high.
It was here, all the way out at the tip of Cape Cod,
Provincetown, Massachusetts, where the pilgrims first landed.
And it was where I first landed.
1972, washed in a town with a headful of orange sunshine and a few friends.
Provincetown, a wonderland of tolerance, long time tradition of accepting artists, writers, the badly behaved, the gay, the different.
It was paradise.
The joy that can only come with an absolute certainty that you're invincible.
None of the choices that you make will have any repercussions or any effect on your later life.
We didn't think about those things.
I don't know what I thought
I was going to be.
At that point, I certainly didn't think I was going to be a cook.
I don't know what I thought
I was going to be.
I was just, you know, hanging out in a beautiful place.
A golden time, I look back on those fuzzy memories and they seem golden anyway.
Oh, there's John waters.
First love, and there's me.
This guy, Johnny was sort of a sinful figure in all of our lives.
Well, my name is John, and this is spiritist pizza, its been here since 1971.
This town is everything to me.
Provincetown is a really special place where people can be themselves.
We all did drugs, acted young and crazy, and Tony was, he was probably a little Wilder than some and not as wild as others.
But he was always the guy who I always liked.
And you let me sleep on talk of the walk in.
I remember that.
I cannot tell you how frequently
I freem about the pizza.
I'm walking down commercial street, and I'm dimly aware that spiritist has moved and there's a sense of dislocation and a loss as I stumble around this
Provincetown dream scape of 40 years ago.
I was still here and living in hope.
Unbelievable.
Many of the old places in p-town are gone.
But the lobster pot is still going strong, all these years later.
And still has what
I want and need.
The essentials.
My friends worked in the kitchen here, starting the tradition that cooking work was noble toil.
I never intended a career as a chef.
It's great to be a cook.
I was getting to that.
Yes.
This is homemade Portuguese
Kale soup, made on the premises.
Its ban long time, thank you.
Enjoy.
Portuguese soup, a P-town version and just what I remembered.
Kale, kidney beans, potatoes.
Oh, I missed you.
I missed you bad.
And that was precisely what I loved about the food here.
The Portuguese thing, dishes like this stuffed COD crusted with sausage, bread crumbs, stuffed with scallop and crab.
Some Sherry, read sauce.
I hadn't been working for a while, I was a deadbeat.
Just scarfing for everybody else.
And he comes from work and says our dishwasher didn't show up today.
You are our new dishwasher.
And I said really.
And the next day I put on the apron and didn't take it off for 30 years.
I'd wake up, all of us go to the beach, hang out until like 2:00, 3:00.
Yeah, it was fun.
Roll into work.
Work all night.
Drinking, getting high, drilling out food.
You have all the food you wanted, all the liquor you wanted?
All the sex you wanted.
All the sex you wanted.
It was true, it was fun.
And still an essential part of the economy.
It was a lot of fun, believe me, I remember.
The flagship, it's where my cooking career started.
Write started washing dishes, where I started have pretensionings of culinary grandeur.
It was a good gig for anybody?
You had to be in a band, here we were, we were dish washers.
Yeah you get older and more sense and you realize that like, you know, you got to like pace yourself a little bit.
Otherwise, we still wouldn't be here.
Well, you know, many of our friends from those days didn't make it.
Many of my friends are dead, yeah.
Keep drinking, keep drinking.
Thank you.
Thank you, Tony.
This place has been here forever.
That used to be the back room.
Back room's still there.
See, it's all falling into place again.
Yeah.
It's not that much different.
It's early spring now, but come Memorial Day, it gets crazy around here, and doesn't stop until labor day.
Provincetown was always gay-friendly, in my time and way, way before my time.
And this place, the Atlantic house known always and forever by locals and visitors alike as the a house as America's oldest operating gay bar.
Everybody has come through these doors, so to speak.
Most notably, naked and frolicy Tennessee Williams.
No.
That's too bad.
Everybody got seasick.
They all save cocktails so I can get my sea legs back.
Oh really?
Yeah.
April owns the joint now.
Taken over for her father, the legendary Reggie, a forward-thinking dude if there ever was one.
It was built in 1798.
How long in the family?
Over 75 years.
My father during that time, he had Billy holiday appeared, he had Cy Moan, El Fanlts, all the big names, jazz.
How has town changed?
Has it changed?
I think tremendously.
Gay lifestyle is much more accepted.
Okay, 1972, my feeling was that this was a gay town and that I was here at the pleasure of, you know, somebody else.
Which is sort of the opposite of everywhere outside of here at that time.
Oh yes.
This was largely catholic,
Portuguese, conservative community, but it was also known as hell town.
Hell town, there's where the pure tins sent their rejects.
Yeah.
Provincetown had the mixture really of the bohemian people and the fishermen, pirates, writers, drunks, all that.
The lifestyle outside of mainstream was welcome here pretty much.
Whatever floats your boat.
You know.
It's all good.
Over a century ago,
Provincetown was a hard working fishing village with multigenerational families of fishermen.
My name's Bo Gribbon.
My father fished, and I was pretty much raised here my whole life.
Where I'm from.
This is who I am.
But it used to be like two out of three families in this town, this community, were fishing families.
Most of them are now gone.
And we're really like a minority.
Used to be a fishing community with a homo sexual problem.
The first Portuguese fishermen arrived here in 1840.
The main families created a community built around fishing, and this town lived off that industry well into the 20th century.
It persisted even when I was here, keeping up the blessing of the fleet.
These days however, there are fewer and fewer boats to bless.
My name's Scott roe, I'm a commercial fishermen, fourth generation.
It was cool back then, started when I was five.
70 and 80 boats here, five or six feet now, now it's just down to like seven or eight.
Now I'm proud of my heritage and
I would never do anything else.
This is my office, man, look at it.
I'm going to do this until
I can't move anymore.
We were all on the town like clock work, 2:30, 3:00 in the morning, it's quiet, the town's been ripped up all night long.
We come down here, hit the water.
What could be better?
Good time to be here, and nice weather today.
Yeah, nice day.
Little breezy.
Might be a little nautical.
A little bit.
I'm sure I'll be fine, I've watched the deadliest catch.
Are you ready?
I'm ready.
Time to press the fun button.
Clear.
All clear.
Used to be this was the best thing in the world.
The greatest thing about fishing, you were kind of like a cowboy, like a pioneer, you could go out, and as hard as you could push, competition was welcomed.
We were fiercely independent.
Independence is like little by little by little taken away.
Is there a limited number of stuff out there?
Well, there's a total allowable catch we're on a 600 pound trip right now.
And the payout ain't much.
Do the math, a good day brings in Se 9,000 bucks, from that
9,000, take away 3,000 for the lease, 1,000 for fuel, and split the remainder amongst the crew.
And on top of that, fishing is a just a crap shoot.
Many days, there's simply nothing to catch.
Where the [ Bleep ] are you doing this?
We love to do it.
It all turned to ship around the break water.
Once we get out to there, and we feel like we're at home.
Like I said, it ain't easy.
Today, according to Bo, Scott, and Zeb, this was just a little breeze.
How rough does it have to be when you look out and say
I'm not going out today?
It starts like blowing like 30, 35.
We like days like this because the competition stays in.
Really?
I doubt you should stay with your dry, you're not making any money... my dad used to say if you're staying dry, you're not making any money.
We're fishing.
So it's not going to snap until... not too often.
No.
I hate when that happens.
Yeah, it's a bummer.
The summer, you'd be able to smell the coconut, another big trick we have.
Now the guys decide they like this part of the beach, right.
So they're all out here, nude sunbathing.
So I pick um my glasses and I tell them, wow, look at the breasts on that girl.
And you give it to them and they see something they weren't expecting to see.
Works every time though.
I can't believe you didn't cook nothing.
I can't believe it, man.
What?
Got Anthony Bourdain on deck and we don't have nothing to eat.
The best part of it, the anticipation to see what's in there.
Oh every time.
I'm like I can't wait.
You're like look and you're like what's going to be in there?
What's going to be in there?
Sometimes it's a disappointment.
But a lot of times it's disappointment.
How many did we get?
A few.
Is there?
All right, we're out.
That's why it's fishing and not catching.
Yep.
Taste all that much better.
This place was, has been here forever when I rolled into town.
How long that has place been open?
For a long time.
I think this is the only place in town that's unchanged.
Yeah, how long do I have to drink here to get my face up there?
40 years?
Couple more years.
Back when I worked in town for fishermen, there was the folks cookies, tap room, and this place.
The old colony.
Of the three, it's the only one left.
Yeah, baby.
Oh wait a minute, I recognize these.
You guys eat scallops.
Yeah.
That's brawny, hard working men of the sea, we deserve these beers, these finest of all oysters, the well fleets.
Wow.
Finest oysters known to man.
These are fantastic.
Wow, what a treat.
Is there going to be a next generation of fishermen in the family?
What happens after you guys?
The next generation of fishermen that are like coming on to our boats, they're opportunist for the income, it's not for the love of being on the water.
The fishing is going to die.
Cheers.
All right.
Thank you, guys.
Cheers.
This is going to end badly.
Cheers.
Cheers.
This is a nice house.
Man, it just feels like I never left in a lot of ways.
But it was 40 years later almost.
That was the the sea over there, a big candy store for, horny, stupid, 17-year-olds with a taste for chemicals.
You know, I was an angry young man.
What the hell was so I angry about?
It came as a rude surprise because I figured I'd be dead by then.
I was still quite some time away from my first bag of heroin, but, you know, it was a fore gone conclusion, my whole life was leading up to that point.
To my first bag of dope.
I left Provincetown with restaurant experience, a suntan, and an ever deepening relationship with recreational drugs.
I went to culinary school, then to New York City, and never returned.
Today however, I'm staying in
Massachusetts, heading over to the western part of the state, one of the most beautiful areas of the country, the gorgeous mill towns, Victorian houses, deeply felt famously upright and wing values, Norman Rockwell
America was something really inexplicable and unexpected has happened.
New England is a new mecca for heroin use.
Emergency room emissions, law enforcement areas dealing with crimes, but never happened before.
Detectives are working around the clock.
Dealers are making a killing.
Not New York or Baltimore or
L.A. or Chicago, but rural towns like this one are now statistically ground zero for the heroin epidemic.
What the hell happened?
The next couple years, if this heroin use trend continues to grow, it may be beyond getting a handle on.
I'm a detective with the greenfield police department here, and my focus is undercover and narcotic investigations.
This is a well-known area to us, and very active.
Heroin use in the past year, its just increased to a level
I've never seen any other drug come into an area.
People are all going to be affected.
It hasn't topped out yet.
Someone you known, someone you went to school with, someone you work with.
So, sunny crocke terms and conditions Ge... gates Ferrari.
Heroin-use, heroin related crimes, overdoses, how does that happen?
I think once this area realized we had a heroin problem, we were already behind trying to play catch up.
We are on the 91 corridor.
Route 91 has been dubbed the heroin highway at this point.
It's a widely used road to go north and south.
There's opportunists here and for low money input, they're getting a high profit.
That's the typical heroin packages.
Bundles of ten, 50 backs here.
60 to 80 bucks for ten.
They can charge what they want.
It's supply and demand.
One dose for most people?
Multiple bags, three to five backs at the same time.
Up to 30 bags a day.
And the current economics of the town, I am the only one assigned to the narcotics position.
How many heroin addicts are walking the streets of greenfield right now?
I'm going to say we're in the high hundreds.
Wow.
We're in the high hundreds.
High hundreds.
It's hitting every age group, economic household, it's out there.
We don't have cribs and bloods taking over motel rooms, the person selling you dope more likely to be familiar than a stranger.
We're going to meet a past distributor I've known for several years.
We meet Carmen, a powerful local heroin dealer turned paid confidential police informant out in the woods.
How'd you get into the business initially?
I needed the money.
I needed to support my family.
Couldn't get a job.
How easy was it to get into the dope business?
Not hard at all.
Because it's cheap.
Was there money in it?
Oh, hell yeah.
Yeah, oh yeah.
It's like mayberry out here from looking around.
Who's using heroin now?
I mean... kids.
Kids.
Today's heroin epidemic is different than the one that raged through America in the
1970s, the few significant ways.
Back then, heroin was mostly seen as a poor people problem, somebody else's problem.
The sort of thing that musicians and criminals got into, marginal people, far from the white main streets of mayberry USA.
But those people did to themselves, well it was unfortunate, but not our problem.
Until somebody broke into your house.
Today, it's absolutely the reverse.
The new addicts are almost entirely white, middle class, and from towns and areas like this.
How do you think you make it better?
I don't.
Whoa.
You don't?
No there's going to be more robberies, there's going to be more killings.
Take one person off the street here, two more come in.
How many customers do you have?
Practically all of greenfield.
What happened?
How did the kid next door, along with mom, pop, and grandma too become users of hard core illegal narcotic drugs, the worst drug, with the worst reputation?
Well, maybe start here.
Once you found the right doctor and have told him or her about your pain, don't be afraid to take what they give you.
Often, it will be an opioid medication.
Here's a 1996 promotional video from the fine folks at
Purdue pharmaceuticals.
It encouraged them to prescribe the latest, newest, more wonderful drug for long-term pain management, Oxycontin.
Some patients may be afraid of taking them because they're perceived at too strong or addictive.
That's far from actual fact.
Less than 1% of patients taking opiods become addicted.
Sales initially and falsely proclaimed as not addictive, absolutely skyrocketed from $45 million in 1996 to
3.1 billion in 2010.
That same year, perdue tweaked the way that we're making it in an attempt to they said, limit its addictive qualities.
Finally the government and law enforcement took a harsh look at the drug and it became much harder to get legally.
Which sucked for the thousands and thousands who by now had a serious habit.
I am Ruth, a family physician in greenfield, Massachusetts, and I grew up here.
My dad was a small town doctor out here.
I'm a total generalist, but for the last four, four and a half years, a larger part of my practice has been focussed on addiction to opioids.
I got put on pain medication.
Then when they started disappearing, everybody else is doing it.
The heroin?
Yeah.
I can get a bag of heroin easier than I can get a joint.
Once they start, they just slip down that rabbit hole and, you know, maybe they make it out.
That's our goal is to get them out and live healthy again.
We've created this mess we're in now.
In downtown greenfield, the people's pint, and ecoconscious, local pub that brews its own beer, uses only farm fresh ingredients and composes its own ingredients.
I meet up for din per.
Who's doing dope?
Everybody starts with the pills.
Nobody that goes from marijuana to heroin.
There's an in between step.
Always pills, it's pills that people get from their doctor.
From me.
Particularly the young people.
Had an injury, a sports-related injury, had their wisdom teeth out, and they felt awesome on the drug, and they were like how can I get more of that?
After three to six months of looking more, they couldn't find it, then they jumped.
Is it a big farm ma pseudocalls felt?
Doctors fault?
Who's fault is it?
It's complicated.
I'm not going to say there's one entity here that's responsible, but there was a lot of money to be made by promoting the treatment of pain to the highest level.
Big pharma made a lot of money on this.
I was taught in residency, you give people as much pain medicine as they need.
Get them out of pain, we'll judge your hospital, emergency room based on your pain scores.
That's how we were taught.
And also told that they're not all that addictive.
We started handing out pills like crazy.
100 million Americans have chronic pain.
So, we did a disservice as doctors and as prescribers, like we took data that was [ Bleep ], and then we went forth with it and said prescribe it to everyone, they won't get addicted.
Guess what, we didn't know what we were doing.
A few miles down the road from greenfield is a Shellburn falls, the good old days everyone used to talk about when I was a kid.
Sundays, church and picnics.
Saturday nights, Sox games, beer, and bowling.
The Shellburn falls bowling alley is where time seems anyway to have stopped.
First opened in 1906, this is the second oldest bowling alley in America.
Dedicated to old school new
England-style candle pin bowling.
The holy rollers, crowd who grew up in Shellburn and plan this is a reasonable expectation to kick my [ Bleep ].
They've been playing here since the '50s.
I was never allowed to come near the bowling alley.
This was my aunt did not think this was a good idea.
Oh it's a tiny little ball.
This looks really hard.
It's very different,
Shellburn falls.
I grew up here.
Very different.
People don't know each other as well as everyone used to know each other.
When I grew up in greenfield, everybody had jobs.
I worked from the time I was 13.
If I had to go back there, now,
I don't believe in drugs, I don't have anything to do with them, but, what choice would I have?
Stand on the corner, I would probably get into a business.
What's a good business?
Well-paying business?
I'm sorry.
That's where we are.
Yes, it used to be a very different world towns like this one.
And there were many.
But like everywhere else, it seems the mills, the factories closed down, and with them a certain kind of social contract with the people that worked there.
My name is ed Gregory, originally from Terrence falls, born and brought up here, born in 1945.
My father was an employee of the draft mill, as was my grandfather.
During the hay day, there were three paper mills, cotton mill, a beehive of activity here.
Back then, a company town like this, the company actually took care of you.
They built and provided homes for their employees.
Schools, the river provided energy.
The company provided nearly everything else.
The hay day is gone.
People are definitely struggling to find work.
The town just kind of died during the '80s.
When the folks came to work, they were immigrants...
Attracted by the manufacturing here.
Correct.
Made it a possibility of owning a home in a decent part of the county here.
So my father was here, millwright, millwright's job is a Jack of all trades if you will.
If there was something to be repaired.
You could work in a mill and live in a nice home, send your kids to school, make a living all on a mill salary.
You bet.
It's unthinkable now.
What happened to the business?
Things are going to other countries, but not coming back to the United States.
This time it's redundant?
Correct.
Again and again all over the country, I keep running into situations like this.
Where industry has died or fled or simply relocated.
I meet people like Charles
Garbel, hometown heroes who for some reason could go anywhere, take their skills, and return to where they grew up.
Shady Glenn diner, today's special, a contribute to the old
European immigrant culture of the area, the new
England boiled dinner.
So I hear rumors of corned beef and cabbage, is that right.
Every week a corned beef and cabbage dinner.
Corned beef, boiled potatoes, steamed cabbage.
That's a beast, awesome, thank you.
How long have you been here?
Two years.
Are you from the area?
I grew up here, been coming through here since a kid.
Who are your customers generally speaking?
Most are retirees, they've been coming since they were 30.
This, you don't see so much anymore.
Homemade pies and lots of them.
All baked on premises.
Raspberry cream pie for me, thank you.
This is not something we see a lot of.
Old school pie like this and this number of them.
Serving made here.
And they're all the original recipes from the '60s.
The index cards are so old, they're all faded yellow.
Exotic for me.
Really?
Oh yeah.
How's business?
It's getting better.
The drug problem has gotten rampant.
Took over may 1st, 2012, I was broken into four times.
It wasn't just me, it was multiple businesses time after time.
I came in one morning to open up, and I had a guy in front of the rebel star and he got up, pulled a knife out.
I realized it really wasn't worth anything over a knife.
What you're doing here is terrific.
A man can go and get a pot open
Turkey sandwich and good slice of pie, it's a beautiful thing.
My name is Heather Taylor.
I'm a mother of three.
The two older kids experienced my addiction.
My addiction started with pills.
I started sniffing heroin.
I shot up for the first time, and shortly there later I found out I was pregnant.
I had my daughter.
She was in the hospital for six weeks because she was addicted to the methadone and I had to watch my baby go through withdraws.
My son was four, and my daughter was six weeks when they were taken away.
I lost my kids for 33 days shy of two years.
I became serious about my recovery.
So is this the bad part of town or is this just a place where you're unlikely for people to find you.
Just a place where people are unlikely to find you.
I wouldn't necessarily say there was a bad part of greenfield.
I mean, it's probably pretty spread out, bad, I guess you'd say.
What would you do?
Come here to shoot up?
Yep.
You know we'd go down here and just hang out down there.
I bet if we walked along here, we'd find needles and bags.
You know.
Basically you'd come down here, shoot up, and what are you going to nod out?
Just sit down... just sit down and hang out.
A day like this, hang out under the underpass over there.
Not exactly la vida loca.
As you can see the trash and yuck, it's dirty and gross.
There's probably people who live down here.
Really?
Yeah, there's a lot of homeless people in greenfield.
What do you think now when you see somebody who's junk sick on the street?
It gives me that yuck, sick feeling.
And it scares me.
It reminds me why I don't want to be out there.
It's just scary.
A friend of mine overdosed
January 1st of this year.
And my brother-in-law overdosed in Wendy's bathroom and they found him.
And they brought him back to life.
He was dead in the bathroom.
Uh-huh.
So this is my narc cam.
I carry this around, I have one of these in my house and
I have one in my car.
I have a fear that my husband's going to relapse and I'm going to find him dead.
You just put this in here and squirt it up their nose.
Now in most cases, as I understand it, they're right out of it.
They're right out of it and instantly sick.
They don't wake up happy.
But they wake up.
Somebody's blue there.
On the floor.
Are you saving that life?
Yep, saving that life.
Absolutely.
And then kicking their [ bleep ].
Better now?
Life better now?
Absolutely.
My kids have been home three years.
You know, I no longer have to watch my back.
You know, I live a pretty straight and narrow life.
Which, you know, people might say is boring, but I love my life today.
I'm grateful.
Where are we headed?
This way.
Oh, okay.
To the recover projects.
This is where my recovery started.
Started near lay decade ago in one of the two main streets of greenfield, the recover project is community-based.
An open arms program aimed at helping addicts stay clean.
Given the opioid heroin addiction in our community, we'd like to start the conversation.
What happened at that point of our life, what that was like.
So as a child growing up in a home of addiction, I didn't understand how they could do all the stuff that they did to me and my brother and sister.
Like don't you love me enough?
Then I became a mother, and then
I became a heroin addict.
And I did all that stuff to my kids.
My doctor was my biggest drug dealer.
Married, had a baby, fell down the stairs, two jobs, college on top of it.
Next thing I know I'm on the prescriptions, that's where it all began for me.
What are the odds you're going to own a house?
What's the odds to have a nice car?
Any car?
A place to live, all that stuff?
Seems less and less likely all the time.
When you stick a spike in your arm and I wouldn't.
So I have this picture in my head which got the phone call my daughter's father had been in the accident and I just had a c-section and come in with this need toll give me at Van and all
I needed was a hug, like I just needed someone to give me a hug,
I care about you, Kaitlyn, and everything is going to be okay.
I'll tell you something really shameful about myself.
The first time I shot up I looked at myself with a big grin.
Something was missing in me whether it was a self-image situation, whether it was a character flaw, stable family, the suburbs, I had a lot of advantages, there was some dark genie inside me that I hesitate to call a disease that led me to dope, you know, I didn't have anyone else who could have talked me out of what I was doing, but intervention wouldn't have worked.
I didn't have a child, I have a
7-year-old daughter now who
I never would have had.
I never would have thought... I looked in a mirror and I saw somebody worth saving or that I wanted to at least try real hard and save.
You know, anybody can find themself very easily in this situation and, you know, I look back on that and I think about what I'll tell my daughter, you know.
You know, that was daddy.
Ain't no doubt about it but I hope I'll be able to say that was daddy then.
This is daddy now that I'm alive and living in hope.
Thank you.
Good.
In Massachusetts the clambake is a ritual going back to the Flintstones, before the pilgrims, today at the long standing locals only shooting club, shoots and Veren in German for the immigrants who started this ray takes me through the fascinating and arcane process of creating an old-school clambake.
Basically we build a kiln with hardwood and stone.
We burn it down, remove the wood and cover it with seaweed and corn hunks and we put our clams and lobsters and corn in there like a pressure cooker.
We've got a pig hiding in there also.
No, no, no.
We'll pull a tusker out and you'll see what we have here.
Let's eat.
All right.
First some good chowder and there really is only one kind of chowder, new England clam chowder.
Mm-mm.
That is good.
Steamer clams, lobster, corn, Potatoes.
Pretty luxurious clambake here.
That was amazing.
Absolutely.
Everybody's attention for a second.
The awareness task force came together several months ago.
I don't think we realized how quickly this could turn into a cite cyst for us.
Everybody in the room has been impacted by narcotics in some way, the opiod task force is a grassroots response.
Doctor, law enforcement led by
Franklin county sheriff Chris
Donilon, addiction specialist and addicteds themselves are coming together to find a community-based solution to what is a public health crisis rather than a criminal justice problem.
A great opportunity to come here tonight to break bread and look at the successes that we have had so far, think what makes me more proud than anything else about living in
Franklin county is that we will not sit back and wait for anybody else to solve this problem for us.
We'll be a model for the commonwealth and nation on how we save our young people and save our community.
The city is the place where all the bad stuff is supposed to happen, not nice towns like greenfield.
It isn't the image that people had 20 years ago, a junkie in an alley using a needle.
It's not.
It's your kids, your neighbors.
The worst I think is when you have these young people who break a leg and they go to the doctor and get a prescription for oxy and become addicted to it.
These are any kid who plays a high school sport.
Heroin was around, pills were around but we didn't have people dying.
Once you've been busted for heroin, that's a hard thing to live down.
Got to get rid of that shame factor to deal with it address it.
Get support from the community.
I feel like we'll lose a generation, 18 to 22, the district attorney, the police department are all united this.
Task force is home to a matter of a hundred people.
I lost one daughter to drugs.
You know, whatever it takes.
Let's start by being honest with ourselves.
As a nation for decades we were perfectly happy to write off whole neighborhoods, whole cities, whole generations of young men and women.
As long as it was an inner city problem, an urban problem which is to say a black people problem, a brown people problem, send them to prison into a system from which they'll never maybe.
Maybe now that it's come home to roost and the high school quarterback, your next-door neighbor, your son, your daughter, now that grandma is likely to be a junkie as anyone else we'll accept there's never been a real war on drugs.
War on drugs implies an us versus them and all over this part of America, people are learns there is no them.
There is only us.
And we're going to have to figure this out together.
