How does the joke begin?
Three men in a bar, but it's not a bar.
Imagine the Bronx.
A corner, or maybe a lunchenette.
Three men find themselves in the same place at the same time.
Sitting at the counter is Africa bombada.
Across the room is Milly Mel.
Door opens and who walk compromises, D.J.
And created the musical style that's become the sound track to well, the whole wide world.
They nod at each other, screwed over, cut out of the big money, or just laugh of a the absurdy of it all.
Hip hop came from nowhere else, it could have come from nowhere else, but the Bronx.
♪ I took a walk through this beautiful world ♪
♪ felt the cool rain on my shoulder ♪
♪ found some something good in this beautiful world ♪
♪ I felt the rain getting colder ♪
♪ sha, la, la, la, la,
♪ sha, la, la, la, la, la
♪ sha, la, la, la, la, this the Bronx.
You've probably heard about it.
You may even have a pretty solid image in your head of what it looks like.
What it is like.
Or maybe you can't picture it at all.
The south Bronx sounds familiar as a bad thing.
And the Bronx at one time was said to be burning, wasn't it?
For the most part, the
Bronx is overlooked, the never visited borough in New York City, which is a shame because the Bronx is a magical place with its own energy, its own food, vibe, and rhythm.
You've been to Brooklyn, maybe it's time you took a look at the Bronx.
August of 1973, the sister of
D.j. Cool herd was holding a birthday party for herself in the basement of 1520 central Avenue.
As he was playing the music on his two disk turntable, he began to slow the music down slow the people stood up and took notice and began asking him to do it again, he did it again, they asked him to do it again, again, he did it again and attracted more and more people to his performances, and people began to imitate him, and that was the beginning of hip hop music.
It started in the Bronx.
Moody's records, inside rummaging for records just like he used to do is the man, the legend, one of the very select few who started it all.
Who created the sound that hundreds of millions of people now claim as their own.
Google, who created hip hop?
Go ahead, you get, D.J. Cool.
It's a national landmark, right?
No, it's not, we're working on it.
It's still the birthplace of hip hop undisputed because I didn't start it with four guys in a club, I was inside a residential building.
At the time, it wasn't really in eye over the recreation room.
So she would watch for any disturbance, it never happened, and that's how it survived because good music said itself, good drug set itself, good anything set itself, and this was something good.
Was there a moment when you realized this is big, this is going to be, this is going to spread way beyond my neighborhood?
Never looked at it as that.
I saw it spreading, but it reminded me of Fred Flinstone.
It's not going to be nothing.
So to say I don't have money and all that, I'm rich in other ways, but time magazine said when music was created inside the United States, Louis
Armstrong for jazz, Elvis
Presley for rock and roll, him and Chuckie Berry, and cool herc for hip hop.
Feel good?
Very good.
Historically, from the last third of the 19th century in to about 1920, it was Germany.
From about 1930 to about 1960, the second language spoken in the Bronx was Yiddish.
From 1965 onward, the second language is Spanish, and that's the way it is today.
It's got a reputation as a tough place, crime, street gangs, a lot of which goes back to the way it was and some of which, well like I said, it's got a reputation as being tough.
The Bronx is, let's face it, a big blank space in a lot of people's minds.
Even people like me who live what, ten minutes away, we don't know anything about that big area between Yankees stadium and the Bronx zoo.
What you should know is that the Bronx is big.
Really big.
And that it's a patchwork of ethnic enclaves, a cross section of the whole world.
Every immigrant group you could think of.
Justin, aka, Barren Imbrosha is serving at the culinary ambassador.
Let the dinner begin.
This is the porcupine.
For the cause of introducing the delights of this mighty borough to the ignorant, well like me.
He's got a show on the TV, and he throws parties where he serves creatures that would make
Andrew Zimmer turn gray and slump unconscious to the floor.
Explorer, and gourmet.
Bronx, it's so multifacetted, but for some reason this is the first place I take people.
This is oozes and imminents that flavor of the Bronx.
And he knows what I like.
Places like this.
188 on 188th street and the grand concourse.
Old school New York
Puerto Rican good stuff.
Get within 20 feet of this stuff and prepare to lose your freaking mind.
It is fried pig.
Ear, tongue, chopped up and deep fried.
Off cut pig parts, deep fried.
What's not to like about that?
Yeah, the shoulder.
We're going to get that in there.
Oh yeah.
Big piece of the skin, just chopped up.
So skin.
Skin and fat?
Yeah.
It's almost like a little meat candy bar.
That's amazing.
Amazing.
And then what else?
We need this.
Yes.
Puerto Rico on a skew.
The Bronx to me became a place where I could really engage my sensibility.
You could really just come here, eat, drink, wine, and just indulge.
This is pretty much the center of the pork universe as
I've ever seen it in New York.
I don't any place porkier than what I'm looking at.
This is exactly the kind of thing I thought we'd lost in new
York, that one after the other faded away in the neighborhood's
I lived in and all along, all along it was there, underfoot, a gusher of porky goodness.
There's a great line, which is they say, in
France, Se la Bronx.
What do you think this is the Bronx?
And this idea of music's really mad or someone's making a mess.
To me I take that as a point of pride.
To be the Bronx, it is where the music is loud, men are tough, women are sexy, and food is spicy.
If those things weren't true.
You wouldn't know what the Bronx is.
Its bad reputation is what protects it?
I think the perception, the perception of it being a place where the funk is alive.
Incredible, incredible spread.
Yeah, man, this is great.
This is one of the places you'll dream about, was I really there.
I'm going back to see if that place is really there.
Lay off this pork.
It's insane.
I'm actually going to get a to go order.
Yo, love for my haters, forgiveness for my enemies, move spectators I'm dead if they shot Kennedy.
I'm from the Bronx, New York, and I don't beg your pardon, I was 12 or 13 when hip hop was started.
Go and take a minute to listen to what those fools speak, it's clear uncut garbage.
Just let me bump, fill my energy up.
No logic, a bunch of false profetes pushing a false positive.
I'm not hard to find, I'm by the zoo, holler at me, baby.
Watch it.
First to call himself an emcee, Melly Mel.
In 1982, and he grand master flash wrote and recorded the message.
An album that was a complete and ground breaking departure from the lyrics and content up to that point.
Before we started doing hip hop music, there was none, we played everything, disco, we played ray gay, we played hop, watched hehaw, that was the favorite in my house.
And all of those things kind of became the components of what became hip hop music.
I started out as a break dancer.
I used to break dance, my brother used to do graffiti, and all of those individual elements wasn't really happening anywhere else.
It was just something that could only have went on right in that area in the Bronx.
Yeah, okay, you may be thinking, what about the sugar hill gang, what about them?
They were an industry band like
The Monkey or Archies, built in catch in quick on a fad.
And they did cash in.
Where were you when realized,
[ bleep ], there's money in this?
Well that first record was king Tim the third, the second and rappers alike.
I used to live on a fifth floor walk up, somebody was playing it next door, fourth floor, the third floor, second floor.
First floor.
Somebody had a boom box outside playing it.
The car that drove by had it on.
Nothing that was like a plague, it was like, it was like locust.
And that's when I realized, you know, it's something that was beyond what we was doing out in the street.
Critically, it's not a great record, but if you play it right now, it's still, you know, it's still a good record.
In this case at least, history has come around.
Today nobody looks back as originals or innovators.
People know who did what.
As far as hip hop now, as far as the music now, these guys are not trying to tell a story of their time at all.
Okay, yeah they popped a lot of bottles, had sex with a lot of women and drove expensive cars and nothing else happened.
You would never know there was a black president, you would never know there was two wars, it's not reflected in the music.
And at some point, somebody was supposed to step up and make those songs, 20 years from now, they'll be talking about the message and planet rock and all the classic records.
You know what I mean?
That's what it is.
Robert Moses has been dead over 30 years now.
And people in the Bronx, for the most part, still hate him.
His role as magser builder...
Master builder, he ran the parkway system straight through dozens of working class neighborhoods, seemingly uncaring about the destruction of whole communities.
Massive housing projects conceived as utopian solutions to stacking the poor or the centralized vertical Ge toes were also his bright idea.
He did leave some pretty impressive dam works behind though, like the bridge, flushing meadows park, the bridge, the Bronx happens to be the home of the two largest parks in New York City.
Helm bay, and you see stuff here you ain't seen in central park.
It comes from Honduras,
Guatemala, and bell please and traced they ethnic group back to a single slave ship that crashed off St. Vincent and freed
Africans, then mixed with
Indians.
Where is home for many of the community living in the U.S.?
You guessed it, the Bronx.
Living in the Bronx, you're able to kind of travel the world without leaving the borough.
Right.
And you know, it's like an addiction.
When you go to another country and the first day in the market, and all your dreams and smell the diesel, and you're looking around, last one thing you're looking for?
To do that in your own backyard, it's... cool.
That's coconut soup with fish... uh-huh.
Over here, we have a tapo.
That looks good.
Banana, and coconut soup.
That sounds good.
Yeah, neck bones and it.
Yeah, let's do it.
So let's put some plants in here.
Mashed plan tans come with just about every dish.
Plantations are part of me.
You'll never have it without it.
Yeah.
Same method, same right hand, same everything.
There's fish and coconut soup.
What kind of fish is this?
Blue fish.
Blue fish.
Awesome, I love blue fish.
And nice smoked neck bones with bananas.
That's officially awesome already.
Oh, that's tasty.
It's really good.
Underexploited fish, one of my favorites.
So you know what I've noticed already, the Bronx is big.
How ludicrous and shameful is it that I can literally see my house from here and I have no idea where I am?
No fault on your own, but I think that's what keeps the
Bronx so amazing, you have all these in touch ethnic enclaves.
I didn't know there were Hondurans here.
I would say the neck is the next big thing for years now.
Still waiting.
People from all over the world reside in the Bronx, as a matter of fact, we have residents from every continent on the face of the earth, and if you count the penguins in the
Bronx zoo, that includes
Antarctica.
The wellspring of hip hop is right around here, a mostly
Jamaican community in Bronx river in the south Bronx.
Jamaicans began arriving here back in the 50s, and still today, Jamaican food, culture, the music, is all over.
Sun dial international headquarters, makers of traditional tonics and herbal remedies, a Bronx institution since the 70s.
This is enough ingredients, this is the oil.
This one is used for any type of bodily weaknesses.
Pops Baba as he's called, grassroots bush doctor, healer, he uses recipes passed from mothers and aunties, roots, spices, herbs, barks, and woods.
Wood root in the morning and at night, it'll cure what's wrong with you.
You're going to have improvement.
Whatever ails, he is a cure.
Root wood cure for the blood, bodies, nerves.
Intestinal cleanser and man back, hopes to get your manhood back among other things.
About 1956 that I came to America.
So I could make it in the apartment in the Bronx river.
And project smell up this roof, they used to drive them.
Hey, what are you doing in there?
What kind of hoekus poekus in there doing.
And I'd go in the car, and
I'd sell it in the Bronx.
The Bronx is the best place in America.
Nowhere like the Bronx.
Up north a ways in west
Jamaica, another working class community where subway service is limited and yet people to have to get up, go to work, and make the long hump to another borough.
Afterwards, a person could use a drink.
And if you're a Jamaican person, you could use the every day drink of back home, any time of day and night, ray and nephew.
It is a very strong Jamaican white rum that we use from everything to drinks here in this bar.
You get it with cranberry juice, milk, or water.
Water would be in every nephew would be ray and nephew in the Bronx.
It's a very fast, free form riff diatribe about life in the
Bronx and what's happening on the news, in hip hop, or last night.
Growing up in the Bronx the city. Olated from the rest of you know what I'm saying, the other city has like city bite, the Bronx doesn't get that.
People on a boat and go to
Staten island before they ride up to the Bronx.
I have to reluctantly have to be part of of the problem.
It's going en to junk if ied, that's not happening any time soon.
It's not.
There's no owner right here.
This is the man right here who made today possible.
Thank you.
I am happy here.
Andly drink more of your ray and nephew, regardless of what it might be doing to my brain, but then, I will eat.
What is this?
Pigtail.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Oh hell, I love this.
Oh.
Man, that looks good.
People sort of, stop paying attention to the Bronx when it wasn't burning anymore.
When fort Apache was something we didn't have to think about.
Let's say this is the neighborhood where they perfected it.
Right.
Do you remember your first time?
I remember my first time.
How do you feel, first time?
I cried.
And that summer, 15 times, stop and frisk, thrown up against the gate, fingers to our genitals cops looking for gun.
But you remember that, you remember your first time.
When you lose your stop and frisk virginity.
I wonder why?
Is it because off CNN show or it is it just because...
I've been arrested.
If you hang out here long enough, I can get you stop and frisked.
They talk about DIY culture, about do it yourself.
And you better be able to do it your [ Bleep ] self in the Bronx because often, nobody sells going to do it for you.
When you go in the Bronx, you're going back in time.
There are certain crimes that will happen here that won't happen here in Brooklyn or
Manhattan.
Purse snatchers.
Really?
There's still crackheads.
There's crackheads in front of that over there, and they are getting their cracks, and they're not bothering anyone.
And they are respecting parts of this community.
You see them every day.
There's a crackhead that's been here for 25 years.
That takes some determination now.
Listen, if I could be a crackhead, I would be the best crackhead possible.
I was a crackhead, and oh listen, people have been there.
No judgments.
Hey, what's up?
All right.
Look, I'm thinking curry goat.
His uncle Vernon used to own this place, but that was three owners ago.
Now it's lammy's, people put too much cinnamon in the goat, which is a sin against god.
Lammy fixed things.
Curry goat and stewed ox tail with rice and peas, collards, and yes, Mac and cheese.
I can't resist.
I mean, correct me if I'm wrong, there's a lot of good food in the Bronx.
There is, there is.
If people would like you know get over their bias and come above 96th street, they would find out.
I mean if the Bronx were a neighborhood in Manhattan, sort of shrunk down, you'd have hipsters crawling over over.
Oh my god.
If you live in the Bronx it's not necessarily that you're going to leave the Bronx.
Why would you go past 149th street?
So all that, repping my neighborhood, the ethnic pride and all that, people hold on to that.
And that's true of Rylander
Avenue, that sort of stuff.
Even this.
Neighborhood was all white until the '50s.
It's very recent the whole immigrant...
Who lived here in the 50s?
All white people.
What kind of white people?
White white.
Like we enjoy milk white, we're kissing dogs on the mouth.
It's moved forward, and there's definitely this whole, you know, like I'm from 233rd, you're from
225th, every ethnic group has that.
And the next group that will take over here is definitely
Mexicans, and the thing is, it's an immigrant neighborhood.
It's not a matter who have owns it, it's who owns it at that time and they're next.
I enjoy good case Dee Yas.
We made the good decision to come to Lamny's today.
Yeah.
Lammy's, I'm here all the time.
I live right there.
I'm always here for the curry goat, Mac and cheese, you know.
Lammy's don't play, man.
The twos and the fives here are the greatest trains because they go from Bronx through
Manhattan all the way through Brooklyn.
It's the only number of lines that will get three boroughs visibility.
The Bronx still here.
Yeah, it's still here.
But you know, like even that, I mean that brings me back, Tony, that sound.
Do you remember the first time you put spray paint on a wall?
Yeah.
When was that?
Uh, summer of '70.
Back then, seemingly overnight, they were everywhere, princes of the city, their pieces stretching across city blocks, whole trains, evermore audacious, some, by this man, were artists.
In the late '70s, to be on of a rooftop like this with a brew or whatever, hanging out, we're waiting for something to come through with a cool letter or like oh my god, look at that.
And kids are screaming, like, oh my god, look, here it comes.
There's my mine.
There's mine, but what if you thought the train was on the left side.
Then you kind of messed up.
Oh no, it's on the right side.
And no, you're not screwed, you wait until this train goes all the way to Brooklyn and comes back.
This was the audience you had in mind?
Does matter?
I think all of us spoke to each other back then.
Other arts.
It was just the rush of the event, and then the accolades you may or may not receive.
Not from the public, but from your peers.
Futura 2000, his style spread across the globe.
I miss those trains.
Others, not so much.
I get it, it went on and on until it seemed there wasn't an untagged, unmarked, bit of wall or window in New York, but for a while, it was a golden time.
Well the whole point of being here... yeah.
Was to me what the Bronx was about, not just the music and the scene and coming up with the parties of Bam and Herc and everyone of that era, but it's watching trains.
We used to call it benching.
You were watching work go by?
Absolutely.
Art lovers.
This was his museum.
Where he and his fellow artists would meet and exchange ideas and admire each other's work.
And it's jarring coming to learn all those years later that it was really all about this, about a few seconds as their pieces rode by to be evaluated by peers.
There for a moment, then gone.
Like well all of their work from that time, long since removed or painted over.
Ultimately, the legacy...
Here, here's our legacy.
We don't have a movement anymore.
The movement has been given to the world.
And if you go to trains in Milan and Paris, certainly not the
Russian system, but if you go around the world, they're bombed.
Their rail systems are destroyed.
But I mean, today, if I could have a train running...
It would be nice.
It would be epic.
I think any artist, Picasso, if that concept was available, like here is some public art guys, threat run through our countryside.
Take the six trains to the ♪ take the six trains to the end of the line, then do the same for the number 29 bus.
Technically you'll still be in the Bronx, but it kind of won't feel like it.
City island is a fishing village turned what?
A parking lot for pleasure boats, and a long established restaurant row for new yorkers.
Pick the perfect day to come out here.
Desus says this place, and
Desus is always right.
How far from the neighborhood by car?
Maybe 15, 20 minutes.
20 minutes.
That seems like a world away.
Yeah, but I want to buy some nautical stuff.
This is New York City?
This is Cape Cod in the Bronx.
Many of my childhood memories, get there and they're like oh the beach is closed far medical race.
It's not a day you go in the water and come out with like a maxi pad stuck to you.
Been there.
So you were here like when, yesterday?
I was literally here yesterday.
Wow.
For my sister's graduation because every time you have an event of note in the Bronx, you have to come celebrate at city island.
I notice all the big catering halls.
Yeah, get married, arraigned, baby's not yours, come here.
Seashore restaurant, a massive fish factory on the water of a type I'm very familiar with, having started my cooking career in one just like it.
I'm also a sentimental fool, and
I love this kind of thing.
Steamers, a true taste of childhood.
Boiled striper and some snow crab and a nice cold beer, yes, thank you, Desus.
It's like a knighting ceremony.
Just kind of sit up, and like oh, take it all in.
Enjoy guys.
Thank you.
I could have done that myself, but...
That's part of it.
Part of the ambience.
This is the perfect place far date, but it's the worst food for a date.
Either a huge turnoff or a huge turnon.
You might give a lady a preview of what they're about to get into.
All the little bib, little sucking action.
Just let them know, in an hour, this could be you.
Wow.
This is pretty awesome.
Saturday night, city island, that's where people are going.
The first European settler to come to the Bronx came in 1639.
His name was Jonas Bronck.
In 1874, all the area west of the Bronx river was the city and in 1895, all the area east of the Bronx river was the city, and 1898, the city decided that the two areas previously inexed should also become a borough.
But what to call it since it never had a name before?
They looked at the map and right smack to the middle of the territory ran the Bronx river, so they named it after the river, the borough of the Bronx, and that is why it is called the
Bronx and not just plain Bronx.
If off question about the
Bronx, chances are Lloyd
Alton has the answer.
Born and raised here, he's never really left for over seven decades.
This is a disappearing aspect of New York for sure.
The real thing Jewish deli, it is one of the last.
There used to be dozens of places where you can get your police cut, pastrami, pickles with soda to drink.
The world series is going on, Howard is on the air.
Suddenly you see a tongue of flame licking up into the sky.
And he says, this is the kind of thing that Jimmy taught us all, ladies and gentlemen, the Bronx is burning.
The old image of the Bronx as middle class, mobile, healthy area had survived up until
1977, this shattered it.
Right.
The Bronx was burning with the story, and that stuck.
Politicians making the south
Bronx a poster child for what was hopelessly wrong, would always be wrong, would never, we were told, get any better.
So we now have what you call a slum lord essentially.
Snapping up large numbers of buildings.
First of all, he takes out a huge fire insurance policy.
So as he goes to the junkies and says listen, you see that apartment on the top floor?
I'm going to turn my back.
You take all of the lead pipes that are in there, but I have one request, please, before you leave, turn on the water, and the they then hire an arsonist and sets fire to the building, they collect all the money, and they leave.
I remember it well.
I remember those years.
Things were bad.
Are things boroughwide, are they getting better?
Is the Bronx better?
Absolutely.
There is more home ownership in the south Bronx than had ever existed in history.
That doesn't mean that we've reached utopia.
How long it will take,
I'm a historian.
I look in the other direction.
I would say my crystal ball is cracked.
I got four cheeseburgers.
Is it the best hamburger in the world?
Far from it, my friends.
Is it even, strictly speaking, a burger?
I mean, it's small and square and steamed.
It can be, especially when you eat a lot of them, as one tends to, a hate yourself in the morning experience.
But if you grew up with white castle like I did and like handsome dick Manitoba did, this connects with some deep dinosaur part of the brain, evoking an emotional response.
This is a big part of my childhood.
We'd come here 24 hours a day.
There were guys on their dates.
There was a bunch of punk rock kids.
So along with that potpourri of humanity I just described you had these guys from the mental institution.
Ah, that's community for you.
That was the Bronx.
That was the Bronx, man.
It was great.
Maybe you know handsome dick from such prepunk legendary bands as the dictators.
Dick grew up, where else, the
Athens, the cultural guyser, the font of art and music that is the Bronx.
And back in the day like me, this was his special warm and happy place.
I can go by and eat a full
2 1/2-hour meal, be stuffed, and see someone eating a white castle, I stilt want one.
You can forget Mickey D’s.
You forget burger king.
You fork all those places.
If you need a white castle scratch, none of the cheap places will do.
I can't stop eating.
The Bronx academy of letters is something of a cause for me.
An institution whose mission I see as absolutely vital.
If kids like these kids from a tough neighborhood, often coming from tough family situations, are going to dot things that they're capable of, of having the things they want.
I believe that there is no way to realize your dreams if you can't articulate them, if you can't with words convince others to give you the opportunities, the chances you need to grasp.
So I wanted to talk today...
Really I'm going to tell you in a short period of time everything I know about writing.
Today I'm dropping by in my role as substitute teacher.
I'm from Manhattan.
And I don't know anything about the Bronx really.
I'm ridiculously, shamefully ignorant.
Do you think people know about the Bronx, what it's like to grow up in the Bronx?
Everybody perceives the Bronx as the emergence of hip-hop and all that, the culture.
But apart from that the Bronx is actually lively at all times.
At night, in the morning.
You hear people screaming from outside your window.
Since I was like 7.
And it's happened that way.
Community's the biggest thing.
I've been teaching here for eight years, and I think that what people forget is a lot of times we talk about this in class, they focus on lots of diseases, health issues, lack of education.
But I can be out with them just walking to the train to go to a field trip and they say hi to at least 30 people.
They know everyone.
What other Bronx specialties should I be paying attention to?
Montano's.
That works for you.
Yeah.
I like bacon, egg and cheese sandwich.
That's a classic.
That's a New York classic.
Sort of a bodega classic.
Love that.
I walk outside and have the Italian icee.
Soon as the weather gets nice and you hear cohito, they've got the best.
What is chopped cheese?
I have to see.
Where does this come from?
This mutant cheese.
This thing, whatever it is, it'll do just fine.
As long as you're reading
Orwell's essays while you're eating it, kid.
I think it's someone who experiments in their home.
Because it tastes so different than like a cheeseburger, which is what it kind of is actually.
But it's... people uptown or like downtown say chopped cheese and they're like, what?
Here you're like...
So this is a regional indigenous special.
And it's newer, too, right?
It hasn't been around that long.
I've been everywhere in the world, and I mean just about everywhere in the world that you can think of.
As beautiful as many cities around the world are, it's really in your blood, particularly if you grew up here.
You're living in Paris, you don't want a chopped cheese sandwich.
You'll be angry you that can't get one.
So there it is.
A peek, a narrow slice of an old, deep, and noble subject.
♪ Causing the co-existence
♪ to morph into a relentless illogical ♪ sitting right there, relatively unexplored.
A cross-section of the tasty, original good stuff.
♪ So gritty I'm grimy ♪ got my city behind me a petri dish for talent, for culture.
The great unknown.
Go look.
The X.
Armageddon.
