So we begin at the end.
After a wild week in Seoul, there was, I believe, something called... involved.
There were many strange and delightful things to eat.
Things might have spun slightly out of control.
♪ I took a walk through this beautiful world ♪
♪ felt the cool rain on my shoulder ♪
♪ found something good in this beautiful world ♪
♪ I felt the rain getting colder ♪
♪ sha la la la sha la la la sha
♪ la la la la sha la la la la
♪ la ♪ the biggest difference between
Korean fried chicken and
American fried chicken... I feel like chicken tonight.
Next, we'll be performing a medially from flavor town.
Who is everybody here?
Come to me, come to me.
Powerful in a small girly way.
Whoops.
Oh, yeah.
You shouldn't be surprised I'm in a happy place right now.
Maybe the best way to tell this story is to start at the end.
Like a dog returning to its own vomit, I keep flashing back to was it last night.
The night before, I smell fried chicken on my clothes so perhaps... hello.
We meet again.
Am I glowing with health and pink, freshly scrubbed?
You look like a better version of yourself.
Why is that?
Because I've lost about eight pounds of dead skin.
Koreans like the idea of optimal cleanness.
We like to be the most clean possible.
I'm okay frankly with soap and water.
I like beer.
Let me see if I can pour this properly for you.
There you go.
Do you know about this?
No.
The Koreans have many eating traditions.
If you have a very big production or big event, you celebrate that in a proper way.
What are we celebrating?
We're celebrating the end of this Korea show.
This is important.
This is the most important thing you've ever done.
There's nothing involved with salt.
I don't have to rub that into my raw, thick skin.
I'm a broken man.
I seem beneath the shame and a headache to be missing a few layers of skin, as if I've been rubbed somehow raw.
I believe in clean, really, but this is beyond clean.
This is sanded, stripped, filleted.
The beer is not helping.
Well, maybe it is.
I think I've had enough.
The gleeful embrace of mixing whiskey, rice wine, beer, and oys oysters, it seems to tempt the fates.
Ooh.
Ooh.
Yes.
Let me ask you one more question.
Uh-huh.
What do you think about
Han now after your trip?
I'm brimming with Han.
I mean I could never actually have a Han because
I'm not that Korean.
This is a genetic over cellular thing.
I understand.
But it's something I feel
I can really relate to.
I'm definitely a revenge is a dish best served cold kind of guy.
You eat a lot of chicken.
You didn't eat all day, did you?
No, I did not love myself this morning.
But you felt better after your scrub down?
It was like punish the evil.
This social contract, the confusion hierarchy of age before everything, fades away.
We are no longer Mr. Ha, Mr.
Park, Mr. No, and Mr. Tony.
We move as one, a band of bros through the night, the world our oyster.
I feel like a boy band.
Johnny cash.
Johnny cash?
Yeah.
Thank god there was no karaoke.
All roads lead to here.
No escape, just embrace.
I'm acutely aware of my role as big brother, my new friends looking at me to set an example.
All right, guys.
Let's party.
Nice to meet you.
So correct me if I'm wrong here.
It is dried squid, m&ms, and mixing your alcohols?
Yeah.
It seemed like a good idea back at the office.
Next we'll be performing a medley from "mama Mia."
We got a low score.
We only got 44.
Mouse?
Mouse fish.
Tony?
You got to go somewhere else.
You got to go somewhere else.
Squid treats and m&ms?
Sure.
Makes perfect sense.
In fact, there were oysters somewhere along the route.
A tale that becomes increasingly worrying with our alcohol intake.
Oysters, awesome.
Nice.
Competitive drinking and shellfish.
Have you ever played in
Korean drinking games?
No.
Well, they have a lot of them.
It keeps the energy up and keeps everyone kind of drinking.
Stop two.
All right.
We're going to play a little game first.
Tony, we're going to let you start the festivities.
You have to use a chop stick, hit everything forward, it's going to splash up.
What?
A strike or a push?
A push.
There's a lot of games.
We're not going to go through them all because it would take forever and we'd be really, really drunk.
But this game is called the bottle cap game.
We're going to pass this around in a circle and you're going to flick it as hard as you can.
No one wins or loses.
We all get drunk.
Very good.
That is brotastic.
Okay, this is chop sticking.
Don't play this game with engineers.
Oh, don't hurt the man.
He's been hitting those oysters hard.
See you in flavor town.
One, two, and three.
It's pretty good.
That's good.
We got to go somewhere else.
Yeah, we're going.
Let's hit the street, guys.
The idea that only an hour earlier we sat like gentlemen and had barbecue.
A rapidly fading memory.
Tony, how many bottles can you drink?
We'll see.
Yes, I remember now.
Somewhere near the start of the evening, the moment little brother grabbed the reins of our soon to be careening chariot unfettered by good sense and the reality of work tomorrow.
Eat the egg, eat the egg before it gets cooked too much.
That's good.
It's good.
You like the marinated one, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
This is being Korea, beer is a must as is apparently soju.
What seems to define Korea as I know it is it anticipates the future very, very well.
This is a country that's famous for looking forward, looking into the future.
Where does one go to see Korea's past, and are these guys sentimental about it at all?
Younger brother?
All right, younger brother.
My mission for purposes of television is to ingraciousuate myself with a total group of strangers, insinuate myself into their lives and insert myself into an expression combining the concepts of company and meal.
In Korean culture, this would be a regular thing.
A one night corporate retreat, if you will.
Which is how I ended up at my appointment with the fates, a barbecue joint popular with the salary man.
How did I end up here?
Mr. Noh.
Tony.
I think they like me.
Do you drink soju?
I do.
This is Anthony Bourdain, CNN.
Good night.
Notice the totally blissed out happy look an my face.
Observe the bowl with nothing left but fiery remnants.
Behold the magnificence that is this dish.
Enough, enough.
That's good.
Geez.
Oh, man.
That's going to go straight to my hips.
Yes.
Okay, okay.
Thank you.
This is a magical dish.
So most people are not sentimental about their time in the military.
Why do this?
Everybody serves in the military, right?
It's mandatory in Korea.
Very happy.
You want the recipe about this?
I got the recipe now.
It's everything mama warned you about, and it's got it all, baby, and when the music is over, your life will have changed forever.
One, two, three.
Okay.
Okay.
Yes.
Yeah.
Dating back to famine years of the Korean war, scrounging from
American military bases, it is a classic example of necessity feeding the mother of deliciousness.
Hot dogs, baked beans, spam, and noodles put together with kimchee.
It became an enduring and deeply loved classic.
Like I used to say to my first girlfriend, how could something so wrong be so right.
You got that right.
No, no, no.
Wow!
No.
I tell you.
I'm sorry about that.
Sorry, man.
Regrettable incident.
Looks healthy.
Look at this thing.
Look at the color alone.
In go the noodles.
Wow.
Yeah, baby.
Yeah, baby.
Come to me, come to me, my love.
Yes.
Little spam in there.
Good job, chef.
Good chefs.
Yes, yes, yes.
Thank you.
My pleasure.
Any time.
In a society reeling from conflict and deprivation, largely without meat and fresh ingredients, this was the gift of the G.I.
The Korean war lasted from 1950 to 1953, but in many ways it never ended.
The country is split in half and in a constant state of alert.
120 miles to the north, a crazy dictator with an army, a bad haircut, and a nuclear arsenal.
This we know.
But the war divided a country and divided families.
Altered forever the
Korean character.
The chef's early experience working the mess hall during his mandatory military service led directly to super stardom.
He beams his cooking show live in more than 50,000 homes today via something called the Internet.
And he's not the only one.
There's competition.
Lots of it.
Broadcast eating, it's kind of a phenomena in Korea, which is how
I wound up in a tent on the outskirts of Seoul.
Right here?
All right.
Classic indigenous ingredients.
No spam.
Excellent.
Yes.
All right.
It's a slaughterfest.
I've gotten killed like 12 times already today, so I think
I'm going to hang it up.
All right, I'm ready for some food.
In Korea, the food delivery system is really good.
Really good.
A whole bunch of food you can just order.
Order food while you're playing?
Yeah.
PC bomb sounds like a male porn store, but this one has a lounge.
Here in Seoul, given that there's an entire strata of professional gamers, more sustainable food is, from time to time, required.
No problem.
Anything you want right to your console.
Real-life, does it have any attraction?
Real life?
You know nongaming world.
People love it.
Professional gamers, people love the professional gamers.
They get a lot of fame for that.
Right.
Oh, man.
This is too much.
You got to get the sauce with the noodle.
Yep.
It's a black noodle.
It should be all black.
Tasty.
Good?
That'll work.
Some of the games you can play while still eating.
One handed?
Basically, you eat a little bit and then play the game, eat a little bit, then play the game.
The only game I've ever really gotten serious about and lived with a year... I spent a lot of time and it was GTA vice city.
In my opinion, it is a little bit violent for me.
That's my personal opinion.
Look, there was a lot of bleeding out in this game.
That's true.
Over the mountain and through the woods to grandmother's house we go, blowing some shit up on the way and was it right click, left click?
Okay.
I'm looking for the little guys with the red over them.
Yeah.
That doesn't look good.
Oh, geez.
I'm respawning.
Yeah, respawning.
You could target.
You can pull long distance or short distance depending on where your target is.
I'm just learning how to move here.
Oh, poor little red riding hood.
She's not good.
If I'm shooting something, it's me.
Oh, no.
Little red riding hood, you're bleeding out again.
Oops.
Didn't make it.
I don't see any bad guys.
Are these friends?
Oops.
Back in the old days before time itself, spending 17 hours a day at places like this was frowned upon by family.
Now gaming has become a respected and often lucrative profession in Korea.
Simon has pretty much retired from gaming, per Se.
Instead he makes a living advising rising stars in the industry.
You do this for a living?
Yeah.
How many hours a day?
The professional gamers, they spend all day playing this game.
They wake up, play a game, practice.
Have lunch, practice again, have dinner, and go to sleep.
Today the game is one of those multiplayer kill fests where mighty avatar post a range of abilities.
There we go.
This is all about love.
Really cute.
Little girl.
That's me?
Oh, geez.
Can we choose another avatar maybe?
Something more killy?
I don't know if I'm going to strike fear into my enemies.
Little girl comes around the corner having a big fireball on your head.
I'll try to keep up with you for a few minutes.
Press W to go forward and press right and left clicked together.
Right key on the mouse.
Forward is W.
Yeah.
E shift and left together.
Shift and then...
Left together, yeah.
Then space, right click, left shift with left click together.
Brutal.
How long did it take you to figure out how to move around in this world?
About ten minutes.
Ten minutes, yeah.
Okay, me and Simon are going up against these kids and I'm expecting to pistol whip some bitches unless time has once again passed me by.
The life of a professional video gamer is a concept that's not easy for me to grasp.
These young nerd lingers are famous.
They have TV shows where they compete and are making actual cash money.
They have sponsors and super fans.
They probably even get laid off this shit?
And that explains how little red riding hood ended up bleeding out on the cold, hard, virtual floor.
Should we start the game?
Sure.
Okay, where's our opponents?
I'm going to fire your ass.
Don't say anything about Wayne Newton.
He's the man.
He's early 90s west coast.
I'm a west coast guy.
I'm not entirely convinced that Korean food is healthy.
Have you always been a food guy?
I'm very happy here.
Last one?
Yeah.
Is this drinks that goes with food or is this food that goes with drinks?
The culture is you have to have something that goes well with that drink.
We should probably be drinking that, right?
Yes.
Have you had soju before?
How often can you come to a place like this a week?
Would you come every day?
Sure.
I like to recommend the soup of death.
It's a soup, but the main ingredient in that is silk worms.
That okay?
Yeah, sure.
Oh.
Nice?
Oh, yeah.
Eating bugs, that is so last network.
How do you like the soup?
The soup is awesome.
I'm going to go home and have Benisans tonight.
Get the [ Muted ] out of my soup and make me a sweater.
Even Koreans don't eat this all the time, but I guess this country makes you feel like if you can't eat this, then you're not Korean.
What were you born?
In New York.
In New York.
Yes.
And were there until until roughly 21.
I grew up on the streets and new York city.
It was automatically you're a chink.
I'm Korean and I'm proud to be Korean.
Mark is what's called a
Korean who has lived abroad.
More and more people are, like
Mark, moving back home for the ever more numerous opportunities.
When I came here, it just felt right for me.
I'm here.
These are my peoples.
This has what I've been missing.
I was considered an outsider in my own country.
I had like this thing going on because I was like am I not
Korean enough if I don't do this, if I don't drink this, if
I don't eat this, but there was a sense of I want to learn this if that makes me feel more Korean.
Nice.
Is this so hard to walk in and eat delicious food and get hammered in the street?
Being Korean is pretty awesome.
Last one.
Yeah.
Nighttime in Seoul and everywhere you go it seems, food and drink.
This is what they call kind of like a pub, if pubs could operate in the street.
You can have drinks, and well, I guess you could call it, pub food.
We're about to go eat some really, really good.
Welcome to Seoul.
Let's do this.
My new friend Mark helped popularize western style hip hop in Korea.
An event that led me to eating silk worms in a tent.
So where are we?
Do I have the position correct?
Are you complaining about your hours?
Number one selling liquor in the whole world.
Prostitutes so many times.
Get many my mouth and stay there.
She's already dead.
Come on.
I'm getting this weird sense of deja vu.
Haven't we been in a fish market in Seoul at some point?
Maybe a slight... what should we toast to this time?
To a triumphant return to Korea?
There's something I've been craving since I got off the plane.
The snacks that accompany your meal in Korea.
This is one of the most exciting things about Korean food.
Doesn't that make you want to drink more soju?
Is that a hint or something?
I know the formality of it all.
The appetizers, yes, I remember these guys.
Bringing back memories.
Here we go.
So this is spicy stew.
I need it to burn.
It has everything under the sun seafood wise.
You can find crab, all kinds of fish.
Fishermen stews all over the world.
Exactly.
This bowl for me, that's the perfect example of
Koreans in general.
We love being together in a space, huddled around a bubbling pot of something.
This is good.
You are failing your duties as a young assistant.
I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
We don't have to drink it immediately, do we?
Face planting.
Koreans, they just want each other to drink as much as possible.
Peer pressure drinking is kind of a big deal.
May I have another glass please?
Korean drinking etiquette 101.
You never pour your own drink.
Younger pours for the older and you never drink alone.
How come all the Korean guys are so tormented?
They're carrying around an unseen weight.
Every single Korean person is born with this thing called Han, which is a deep sorrow and anger.
It has nothing to do with your upbringing.
Han, my favorite Korean word.
Generally speaking, it is a mixture of endurance, yearning, sorrow, regret, bitterness, spite, hatred, and to bide your time until revenge can at last be exacted.
Revenge is a very, very sweet tasting thing for Koreans because there's been so much wrong that's happened to us.
What about little Timmy master who is made fun of you in second grade?
Is there vengeance coming their way?
I want them to actually love Korean food now.
Doesn't sound anywhere close to personal suffering.
Well, that's my personal story.
I would think electric nipple clamps.
They slowly bled the reason that Koreans are able to just not wallow in that is because of this other emotion called Chung.
It is a deep fondness that you have for your other Koreans, and people all focus on Haun and I know, like, Haun, yes, yes, yes, it exists.
No one is denying that.
We all have it.
But Chung, no one talks about that and it's equally strong.
Okay.
I believe you.
I don't think you believe me about this Chung thing.
No, I believe you.
Like I like the whole idea of Han.
I totally get that as an engine.
I like that.
I like that dark side.
The fact that this word exists is sort of awesome because a negative emotion has been converted into a number of very, very, very positive developments.
Absolutely.
Koreans are, you know, this amazing group of people that don't curse and eat amazing food, and we like to drink and have fun.
Oh, stop sucking up.
So, to the Han.
We need to make a serious toast.
We're you a nuclear and amazing.
That describes me.
I'm not drinking this.
No, you don't have to drink it.
My relentlessly cheerful friend and colleague Nari.
She loves Korea and all things
Korea and wants nothing more than to make everybody love it as much as she does.
That's why she brought me here to the Garak fish market where you find the kinds of casual joints that I love.
I will have, let me see, perhaps the fish.
I want some enchana and spicy stuff and we'll start off by drinking.
Yes.
I'm getting a weird sense of deja vu.
Like haven't we been at a fish market in Seoul.
Walk down memory Lane.
At some previous life.
The past, the present, the future.
In Korea they all bleed together.
If you're there for the whole ride, one explains the other.
Drop in in the middle, and it makes no sense at all.
Korean culture, as far as I can tell, is defined by the drive to succeed, a churning engine fueled by decades of Han, a remarkable ability and remarkable willingness to anticipate the future.
It reaches back across time and binding millennials and generations long since passed.
Last time I was here I was working for another channel, the bacon channel, the competitive eating channel, what was that old show called?
It was so long ago.
Back then I was dragged around in Nari's powerful wake, as I recall.
That was nearly a decade ago.
Things have changed since then.
I've changed and I'm guessing
Nari's changed, and Korea,
Korea has certainly changed.
The Korean war ended more than half a century ago, but in some ways it's still going.
The north and south have been on perpetual war footing ever since.
It's a psychological and physical scar.
Korea is literally split in half, but that's not what this show is about.
There aren't many comparisons to
South Korea's stratospheric rise over the last decade.
One of the poorest countries as recently as '60s, today it claims one of the world's fastest growing economies.
The government has been extremely shrewd and forward thinking about selling the world all things Korean, underwriting, encouraging, financing and supporting the export of intangibles, things like music, movies, TV show, food, the whole
Korean sensibility, and the world is responding, learning to love what Koreans have always loved.
The heart of Korea is Seoul, capital city, a bustling
Metropolis.
Futuristic in look and character.
Population 25 million.
Look at that.
They have a selfie stick.
Everybody is taking pictures of their food.
They feel right at home.
In October 2014 I went back to Korea.
This is what I saw.
This makes me so happy.
The kimchi, make room for the noodles.
Oh, that's good.
Should be no surprise that
I'm in a happy place now.
Oh, yeah.
First night back.
Back to the market.
Unrecognizable and invariably and inevitably delicious food.
Good to be back, man, good to be back.
