Boom.
Oh, my God.
What hurts?
Yeah!
Aww!
♪ I took a walk ♪
♪ Through this beautiful world ♪
♪ Felt the cool rain on my shoulder ♪
♪ Found something good ♪
♪ In this beautiful world ♪
♪ I felt the rain ♪
♪ Getting colder ♪
♪ Sha la, la, la, la ♪
♪ Sha la, la, la, la ♪
♪ Sha la, la, la ♪
♪ Sha la, la, la, la ♪
♪ Sha la, la, la, la, la ♪
What if we just get Dino's, and go to Edgefield and go to Robert's?
I mean, I'm not trying to screw...
The only thing is Edgefield closes at midnight.
You got to see... have you been to Robert's?
But Dino's definitely starter and that's it.
Saw the hotel, man.
Oh, I know.
Hold on. Time out.
Stop, stop, stop.
You've never hung in Nashville?
No.
You're gonna have a fun time.
I have no doubt.
♪ Let's go back to Tennessee ♪
Nashville, if you haven't been there you probably know it as what?
A country music capital.
Grand Ole Opry.
And it is Music City.
♪ Let's go back ♪
And there is indeed plenty of country music, both genuine and fake-ass.
But it's way more than that.
Nashville is one of the fastest growing metropolitan areas in all America.
People who grew up here will tell you the city is in a state of perpetual, never-ending change, and the rate at which things are changing is accelerating.
Eighty to a hundred new faces move to Nashville every single day.
Some things are constants, others in flux.
Even with all the radical cultural shift, this city still remains traditionally Southern in its sensibility, for now, anyway.
Because Nashville could just as soon be called
Punk City or Rock City.
You are just as likely to find the word "artisanal" hanging over the door of a sandwich shop, or a cupcake shop, or the slow drip coffee laptop zone as anywhere in the land of man buns in the cities of the North.
So, of course, the chefs are coming.
Carpetbaggers seeking their fortunes, attracted by a more affordable business environment or just looking for a better quality of life.
Sons and daughters of the South looking to honor the traditions they grew up with, but with a more modern sensibility.
♪ Let's go back to Tennessee ♪
Here's four chefs who helped change things, who were instrumental in starting something truly new and innovative, but, well, because of their efforts and their mentoring, their early examples is becoming more and more accepted practice.
Tyler Brown of Capitol
Grille in Southall.
Tandy Wilson, the City House.
Our old friend, Sean
Brock of Husk Nashville.
And the distinguished Pat Martin of Martin's Bar-B-Que Joint.
Sundays are often spent here at Pat's house.
Friends, family kicking back and drinking beer, and cooking over the fire pits.
All these chefs pride themselves in celebrating local, seasonal Southern ingredients and close relationships with farmers and food producers from the area.
Those are 90-day-aged rib eyes from nearby Bear Creek Farms slowly cooking there.
And they're gonna be topped off with oyster mushrooms, and bourbon soy, and some nice, runny eggs, and garlic.
Grits, well, of course.
These are called greasy beans, pressure canned in salt water then heated up with pork fat so I'm not hating that for sure.
There's also homemade ricotta served with a cold-smoked sausage and roasted acorn squash.
You better get it, friend, because if you don't, you're screwed, man.
Let's say everybody gets an egg.
- Everybody cool with that?
- Oh, hell yeah.
So it's a must.
It doesn't really matter what I'm eating if I'm eating outdoors.
Really?
I love eating outdoors.
Yeah, me too.
Oh, yeah, now we're talking.
Thank you.
So who started in the restaurant hospitality business in Nashville first?
- He started...
- October of '06.
We started in 2003.
What was it like in '03?
What did people wanna eat in Nashville in '03?
Holy cow.
Well, steak and potatoes.
- Steak house, man.
- That's all it was.
Those were the only places to eat.
Which came first, the customer or the chef in this case?
Chef.
Chef showed up first.
How open to new shit?
That's the thing about Nashville.
Always?
People... yeah.
- 'Cause it's artistic.
- People are very progressive.
It's such a creative... -
It doesn't mean they know what they're tasting or at that time they knew what they were tasting, but they wanted it.
Who's here... who's from here originally?
I am.
That's it?
I think so.
So then we're all carpetbaggers at this table?
Yeah.
I mean, right?
Nashville's Lower
Broadway or Music Row.
It's what Nashville's selling.
It's what the tourists want.
And the honky-tonks or McHonky-tonks that line the strip now tend to lean more towards cover bands than singer-songwriters.
On one hand, it employs a hell of a lot of musicians, which is a good thing.
On the other hand... Whoo! Yeah!
This place is killer!
Yeah!
Stray from Lower Broadway, and you're bound to stumble upon a genuine dive bar...
Tastes like hipster.
And Nashville's got some real good ones.
So what is this place?
Dino's?
It's a burger joint that's been here for a long time.
A lot of country music history is in here.
A lot of Nashville history is in here.
It's a fun place where you see a lot of new
East Nashville life.
Order up.
I can't tell you how many burgers that I had in here that I don't remember.
There's a picture of them on my phone.
"Oh, I had a burger at Dino's."
What... what is... what is this?
They call these hot fries.
So it's like the flavor of hot chicken but it's with fries and Velveeta.
- Wow.
- I think it's Velveeta. Yup.
It's like country poutine.
Exactly, man.
This is like redneck poutine.
It's good.
That's good.
Yeah.
Tony, what's cool about, like, these dive bars here is there's so many studio musicians here.
If you're not a badass musician in this town, you're not gonna make it.
So everywhere you go, you're hearing the most incredible players you've ever seen anywhere in the world.
What music rules here still?
I mean, is it country music still?
Well, they've f'd up country music so bad on Music Row, it's not even funny.
That's not country music.
To me, it's not.
It's bullshit.
But there's also so much more than country, you know.
Oh, man, that's the thing that people don't realize about Nashville is... it's not just country music.
If you're looking for iconic Nashville, what's bone deep, local, even deeper than the dive bar culture, you would be talking about a thing called
Meat and Three.
Meat and Three is a cafeteria type institution offering, for a set price, the choice of meat and three sides.
I've been thinking about this all day since I've...
Have you?
Oh, hell yeah.
It's the real deal.
Dandgure's in downtown Nashville is just such an institution.
Doors open at 10:00 a.m. and close at 2:00 p.m.
With a rotating selection of a dozen lunch staples, you're pretty sure to find what you came for.
Okra or black-eyed peas, what do you think?
What should I do?
Okra.
Okra, okay.
This gentleman too is something of an institution.
Jesse Boyce, a two-time
Grammy Award nominee, instrumentalist, songwriter, producer, and CEO of Sovereign
Music Group in Nashville.
This a big Nashville tradition, the Meat and Three.
Absolutely. You see...
You see a little bit of everybody in here from... from truck drivers to mothers to lawyers, whomever.
You can see it's multicultural.
Everybody just, like, really comfortable with each other.
Like a microcosm of what
Nashville is really like.
Yeah, I mean, most people,
I think, who haven't been to Nashville outside looking in, they see Nashville, they think country music.
- Exactly.
- But it's really not that at all.
I mean, yes, it is.
There's a hell lot of country music here.
But we have two strands of music that were emerging at the same time, historically.
'50s and '60s we had Hee
Haw and Night Train.
All aboard.
The Night Train now boarding.
And you have the best seat in the house, so let's get rolling to great entertainment.
Night Train was the black TV show.
Mm-hmm.
That had all the major RnB artists on, and the local artists on, the same as we had with "Hee Haw" and all the country artists.
And then you had
Jefferson Street.
Jefferson Street is where all the black artists came to play.
People like Jimi Hendrix,
Little Richard, B.B. King,
Aretha Franklin, Ray
Charles, all of these people played in Nashville on Jefferson Street.
We had blacks and whites coming in to the inner city.
We didn't have Broadway.
We had Jefferson Street.
Back in the day it was the place to go.
The Jefferson Street
District no longer resembles its neon-lit heyday.
Like a lot of historic neighborhoods in Nashville it's being slowly eaten by developers to make way for the shiny and the new.
To accommodate all the new arrivals.
♪ It was over before it even began ♪
But what's left is a pretty amazing musical legacy and one that's often overlooked or sometimes simply forgotten.
Everybody's moving to Nashville.
This car, affectionately referred to as the Black Shark, did in 2012.
Along with its eight cylinders of Detroit-made awesomeness came Alison Mosshart, singer-songwriter for the London-based band
The Kills, which she formed over 15 years ago with Jamie
Hince, and more recently, locally based The Dead Weather.
♪ Oh, my shaking heart ♪
♪ You got me from the start ♪
♪ You got me good ♪
♪ You aimed and then you shot... ♪
Straight through a red light.
Boom.
She needed someplace to park her car, she says, and Nashville seemed right.
I lived in London forever riding a bus.
I really wanted to get a muscle car, and I needed a garage to put it in.
There's no way I can be unhappy in this car.
Completely understand the relationship.
This is a custom-made
Dodge Challenger.
If it hits you with speed, it will mess you up real bad.
I love this car.
I'm having car envy.
This is Nashville hot chicken.
If you order it in its hottest iteration, it too will mess you up, as I came to find out.
Hot chicken recipes are notoriously kept secret, but preparation always begins with the poultry getting double dredged and deep fried for a thick, crispy crust.
Then each piece is given a wet or dry application for that sought after, caustic kick.
With the wet, the chef's mix of hot spices comes in an oil-based sauce or paste that the chicken is dipped in or coated with.
Other cooks use the dry method, coating the chicken with a blistering blend of cayenne, sugar, paprika, and other secret spices, to form a fiery outer layer.
If you come here to the very fine Bolton's for your hot chicken or their optional hot fish, it can, in its milder forms, which are still scorchingly hot, -be delicious.
♪ Yummy ♪
But try the hot stuff and watch out.
No, really watch out.
How long have you been in Nashville?
Four years, maybe.
Yeah, I was working here all the time.
- I loved it.
- I thought it was beautiful.
Lots of people I knew were moving here.
Lots of bands.
Lots of rock and roll was coming to town.
Yeah, a real lot.
You know, when I was touring when I was a teenager, this is a place you would avoid.
If you were in a punk band, don't come play Nashville.
No one will come to your show.
That sort of seemed to change, like, ten years ago where suddenly it was, like, people are showing up.
Order.
Right. All right.
From left to right: hot, medium, mild.
And there's your fish.
Spicy - Okay, thank you.
I didn't even order, so you guys go for it.
Oh, you're gonna have to try something.
Matthew Mosshart, Alison's brother, is a professional chef who moved here in 2013 to start a catering business.
Should have gloves on.
Oh, man.
The medium is really hot.
That's really hot.
And it... and it just keeps coming.
You're already diving into the coleslaw at a million miles an hour.
Yeah.
It's like... -Oh, my God.
Are you done?
Yeah, this isn't good.
- That was...
- Which one did you get?
I think medium.
Mild. Whatever it is.
You know?
I know that I don't have a hot one, but this is hot anyway.
I'm just... I'm trying to bond it, you guys.
All right, I'm going in.
Do not resuscitate.
Oh, man, you don't want this.
Oh, oh, that hurts.
I think I'm hallucinating.
It'll put you in a head spin.
Oh, my God, Anthony.
It's like a sharp burning, and it just keeps coming, and coming, and coming.
It's not going away.
You got nothing on yours?
Was it, like, a medium?
- I'm good over here.
- I'm real good.
You're good to go.
This is great.
A little bit of mustard?
There appears to be a little bit of mustard on here, yes.
How bad can it be?
I just experienced, like, 12-hour payback for... from hot chicken.
Right.
And this was an existentially awful experience, and I really... there were moments when I didn't think
I was gonna make it.
This has got to be so much better than that, and it's only three minutes.
Only three minutes.
I'll take it.
They serve snacks in there?
My friend Dean Fertita plays guitar and keyboards for Queens of the Stone Age.
And he also plays with The
Dead Weather, with Alison, who you just met.
A Nashville resident too, he trains in Krav Maga, a lethal martial art at the same gym where I train jujitsu when in town.
These things hurt.
They punish the body.
They make a person sore.
Fortunately, I had a knuckleheaded idea and a place to do it.
Cryotherapy, the latest in muscle recovery treatments.
So far so good.
It hurts.
No.
No.
This is a terrible restaurant, Tony.
Basically you step inside a big tube into which liquid nitrogen is pumped chilling things down to a less than comfortable minus 300 degrees... -Oh, God!
To apparently convince your body that it's dying on the permafrost, causing it to kick loose all sorts of emergency, lifesaving, anti-inflammatory proteins, after which you are supposed to feel better... -Oh, God!
If your fingers and penis don't shatter like Hummel figurines.
Oh, God!
You did it.
Oh.
Watch your head.
All right!
Take it off.
Well, how do you feel?
Good luck.
I'm dying.
In a good way though.
All right, so step right in.
No, I'm not ready.
I don't like... I don't like the way he looks.
He looks unhappy.
All right?
It's all right.
Did you notice how, like, the last 40, 50 seconds were the coldest?
Yeah.
Pretty much his whole session's gonna be like that last 40 to 50 seconds.
The whole session because you're going second.
Oh, yeah.
That's uncomfortable.
Yeah, you're already at negative 306.
Oh, yeah, that's bad.
That's bad.
That's not good. Oh, my God.
You can do it.
You feeling all right?
No, no, it's bad.
Oh, I wanna rub some hot chicken all over my body.
It's been... it's been ten seconds in.
Oh, don't tell me that.
See, he's already at negative 308.
You didn't hit negative 306 and 308 till the last minute.
How long have I got?
You're not even halfway there.
I'm not even halfway.
I'm trying to be helpful, but
I can't even talk right now.
- Yeah.
- How are we doing for time?
You're almost done.
- Yeah, what's almost mean?
- Ten seconds.
Really?
Oh, yeah.
Ten seconds.
You got it.
Wow.
This is on There's still a third level.
Level two?
Yeah.
There's still one more level up.
What's the longest you can go in it?
Three minutes.
Three minutes.
Watch your head, sir.
Well, I always wondered what it was like to have a micro penis.
Ooh, I feel a little crispy.
That was kind of awesome.
Freshly invigorated by our sub-zero experience with newfound appetites to go with our newfound cryogenically induced superpowers, Dean and I head over to City House, Tandy Wilson's place, for some pizza.
So would you say that what you've seen here is what you were expecting to find?
I like it here.
It's a friendly town.
- And it's friendly.
- Yeah.
I know we were... I remember when we first came down here, we'd go to the gas station and people would say hello
- and we would be like...
- Yeah, that takes some getting used to.
- What is that?
- Yeah.
I'm assuming she's half kidding, but Alison said it's all about the car.
She needed someplace to park the car.
- Why she moved here?
- Yeah.
I totally believe that.
You don't doubt that?
- She does love that car.
- Right.
I mean, as much as I talk about it I would never buy a muscle car because once I start, it's like I would never be satisfied.
I would, you know, I mean, you don't wanna be like Jay Leno with, like, 30 muscle cars.
You know, let's face it.
If you own 30 classic muscle cars, there comes a point where people are gonna look at you and say, you know, sorry about your penis, you know?
There's something... something else going on here.
Music is a $10 billion a year economy around here, employing more people than anywhere else in the country.
Its producers, its session artists, even the studios themselves are legendary.
If you can make it as a working musician in Nashville where there's anything but a shortage -and standards high...
Okay.
You can pretty much make it anywhere.
Lightning 100.
This is Jason Moon.
In the studio with us today,
Nashville artist, Margo Price.
FADER Magazine has called her Nashville's favorite new badass.
We agree and she's here to play a couple new songs for us.
Thanks for having me.
One, two, three.
Margo Price grew up on her family's farm in Buffalo Prairie, Illinois.
Her family was forced to sell when she was age two, which is pretty damn country already if you ask me.
As a country music traditionalist, she struggled for years to find her place within
Nashville's increasingly pop-driven country scene and the growing indie rock one.
In 2010, she lost one of her twin sons to a rare heart condition, self-medicated with alcohol, and ended up with every kind of problem, including problems of the legal kind.
She poured her heart and every cent she had recording an album in just three days at the legendary
Sun Studios in Memphis, selling her car and her wedding ring along the way.
♪ Dogs that howl ♪
♪ On dead end roads ♪
♪ They remind me ♪
♪ Where I am ♪
♪ And all the sins ♪
♪ I gave away ♪
♪ Well, I got them ♪
♪ Back again ♪
♪ The pain has made me wise ♪
♪ No wasted tears to cry ♪
♪ So many things ♪
♪ You never said ♪
♪ But you told me ♪
♪ With your eyes ♪
The album, "Midwest
Farmer's Daughter", was rejected 30 times by the major labels until she found herself on the radar of Jack White and his brilliant and eccentric enterprise,
Third Man Records.
Third Man's impact on the
Nashville music scene can't be understated.
With an eclectic, unpredictable list of artists, reissues, and obsessions, they've tilted the town's axis a bit making
Nashville the center, not just of country music, but also, what?
Of course, White has also produced albums for country music legends like Loretta Lynn.
So if anything, they are reliably unreliable when predicting what they might do next.
Let's get ready for a full take.
Right now what comes next is Margo Price, who's recording today at Third
Man's live music venue,
The Blue Room.
The recording, a unique, one of a kind operation because it's all going directly to acetate.
Before digital and before analog tape was used for mastering, disk recording was done live.
No editing.
No overdubs.
Redirecting this process on this 1953 lathe,
Third Man has mastered a number of albums like this giving listeners as close to a live experience as possible.
Also, it's kind of cool.
Here's at Third Man in the
Blue Room, it's the only place in the world where you can actually do a live to acetate recording.
♪ 'Cause all I wanna do ♪
♪ Is make something last ♪
♪ 'Cause I know what I am ♪
♪ I know what I have ♪
♪ I wanna buy back the farm ♪
♪ And bring my mama home some wine ♪
♪ Turn back the clock ♪
♪ On the cruel ♪
♪ Hands of time ♪
That album that was rejected 30 times debuted on Billboard's Top
Country chart at number 10 in its opening week and was this year's number one country album in the UK.
Margo's promotional tour includes performances on Saturday Night Live,
"Conan", "Colbert", and the Grand Ole Opry itself.
But before heading out on the road, the band and friends gather one last time at
Margo's East Nashville home.
Her husband and bass player in the band, Jeremy, prepares biscuits with pimento and cheese, topped with chopped bacon.
Along with red wine braised short rib on a crostini with goat cheese.
Yeah, right.
Yeah, oh, yeah.
Nice.
It's cold.
Do you guys eat like this all the time?
No.
He cooks.
He cooks like this all the time.
He's worked in, like, every restaurant in town.
Yeah, we've all been in the restaurant business.
You, you, you.
He just got fired from a job over on the west... sorry.
Way to go, Vernon.
First of all, let me ask, who here is from
Nashville originally?
Exactly, she is.
This has been pretty much the story of my experience here so far.
You know, the town has a reputation.
There are so many really good musicians here.
Does that make it harder to break out here?
And ultimately, what happens if you suck here?
Like, I mean, if you can't, if you play country Western...
I mean, it is... - And you cannot... you're not good at your instrument, can you make a living here and suck?
Absolutely.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Not to say, like, there's tons of bands that suck or something here, but when I came here,
I wasn't good enough, and I went out to some, like, writers rounds, and
I learned very quickly that I was... I had to be a better player.
I had to be a better singer.
I had to be a better writer.
And, like, so, you know, you work hard because you're surrounded by that.
It's like you're typically playing to, like, a whole room of, you know, pickers and writers.
And so it's like, how many
Nashville musicians does it take to change a light bulb?
One to do it, and
20 to stand around and say, "I can do that."
♪ I put a hurting on the bottle ♪
♪ Baby now I'm blind enough to see ♪
♪ I've been drinking whiskey like it's water ♪
♪ That don't touch the pain you put on me ♪
There seems to be a sense, like, a lot of established bands have always come here for something metaphysical.
I mean, they say, "Well, it's
I wanna work with particular" session musicians," or "I wanna record at a particular studio."
Yes.
But that's really a kind of a metaphysical decision.
Does that particular mixing board actually possess magical powers...
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That will make your record better?
I kind of feel like there's something special about a room.
You go into RCA Studio B where all the Elvis singles were cut, all the Orbison singles were cut,
Everly Brothers.
There's something special about that room.
Yeah, I mean, you joke around about, like, the thing about,
"Oh, there's something special in the board."
Sometimes there is.
♪ I put a hurting on the bottle ♪
♪ Baby now I'm blind enough to see ♪
♪ Been drinking whiskey like it's water ♪
♪ But that don't touch ♪
♪ The pain ♪
♪ You put ♪
♪ On ♪
♪ Me... ♪
All right, let's take it home.
Sign of the apocalypse or an age of enlightenment, you decide.
The craft cocktail program has arrived, and it's spreading fast.
Josh Habiger's cocktail bar, Patterson House, and its upstairs,
20-seat counter-only restaurant Catbird Seat, has been catering to the sophisticated palates of Nashvillians since 2011.
Josh rolled in from Chicago, a self-trained mixologist, as they call makers of drinks these days, and professional chef.
He's got five acclaimed restaurants across the city.
- Cheers.
- Thanks for playing.
Yeah.
So, do places like this represent that the town has changed, or did they change the town?
When we opened this, I was amazed by the support that we got from people.
People didn't wanna hate us.
They wanted to like it here.
Really?
I mean, in New York, particularly if you come from out of town.
- Mm-hmm.
- We kind of wanna hate you.
I mean, we're not the cold-hearted town that people portray us to be, but, especially if you're hot shit somewhere else...
Yeah.
You're gonna have a real steep climb in New York.
We are kind of hoping you're gonna fail.
Yeah.
If we can help you, we will.
It's not like that here from what I understand.
The carpetbagging interlopers are welcome here in a way that they are not in a lot of places.
Mm-hmm.
Whether it's music or restaurants, or are... come here and do creative shit.
Yeah, it's a really cool place.
It's a... it's a lot of fun.
A little crumble of sea salt.
Let me know when it's ready.
The idea of this place was to cook the way the bartender bartends.
When you're looking the person in the eye and handing them a plate of food, there's no... there's no hiding.
If... if they love it, then you see that.
If they don't love it, then...
Plan B.
Yeah.
So menu changes every night?
At the... at the whim of Poli right now.
Chef Ryan Poli is the new kid in town fresh from Chicago.
A veteran of Mercadito,
Hospitality's Tavernita,
Little Market
Brasserie, and Barcito.
All right, the first serving we have, this is risotto, but instead of using rice we use sunflower seeds.
We treat it like a normal risotto, we add parmesan cheese and a little bit of butter.
We topped it with a little bit of fermented sun chokes, the base of the sunflower plant, and just garnished it with a little green sunflower sprout.
So we use three different cooking techniques of one ingredient to make this dish.
Enjoy.
Beautiful.
Mmm. Wow.
That's insanely delicious.
Nothing about that description sounded particularly interesting to me.
Delicious.
This next course is a play on a very traditional
Italian dish.
Linguini, chili flakes, a sea urchin or crab meat.
This is our version, we just use Japanese ingredients.
So we made a wakame seaweed bucatini.
We use yuzu kosho to represent the chili flakes.
A little bit citrusy.
A little bit spicy.
And then we took scallops, and dried and smoked them,
- and grated it over the top.
- Enjoy.
Oh.
Thank you.
Man, you are talking my language here.
That's obscenely good.
I would face-plant in a big [...] bowl of this.
This would be good...
Remember when Tony Soprano would come home?
Like, he'd come home after a night of whoring and killing people, and he'd go home, and he'd open the refrigerator, and there would be, like, a Tupperware container, and there'd be, like, some cold, leftover zini that Carmela had made him, like, maybe the night before or maybe two nights ago, but the fact is it was there.
As completely awesome as this is, I would wake up and eat this cold, like in a Tupperware container the next morning.
I would totally eat this.
It's completely awesome.
It's a great compliment.
There's a couple cookies in here for you.
One's a macaroon, chocolate, and raspberry.
- So, thank you.
- It's been a pleasure.
Wow.
Enjoy.
Mmm.
I like rooting around in Gene Simmons' brain.
Yeah, I do not approve of your right-wing politics.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Why?
Welcome to Disgraceland,
Alison's Nashville home.
It's a house party, so there's got to be food.
You're just doing a small series there where you weren't looking?
You don't have to look when you cut, right?
- No.
- We can look at each other.
Yeah. Watch.
Ready?
Okay.
And as one must at any reputable house party, live entertainment.
Dean Fertita, Jack Lawrence, Mr.
Jack White, and Alison Mosshart.
Known, I believe, as
The Dead Weather.
♪ I never know how to treat you ♪
♪ You say I love you but it ain't true ♪
♪ I'm walking away now ♪
♪ Hey ♪
♪ One step forward ♪
♪ And back two ♪
♪ I like you grab you by the hair ♪
♪ And hang you up from the heavens ♪
In the galley, Matthew and I slave over celeriac, apple, and walnut salad, fried pork dumplings, pulled pork with red cabbage, and deviled eggs, because it ain't a party without deviled eggs, and brisket.
♪ Ooh ♪
♪ Ooh ♪
♪ Ooh ♪
♪ I wanna grab you by the hair ♪
♪ And hang you up from the heavens ♪
Ow!
Thank you.
In another part of the house, free party favors for everyone.
Permanent ones.
Choose your tattoo carefully, my drunken friends.
Choose well.
Oh, you spelled
"Donald Trump" wrong.
Damn it!
Also on the bill, The Kills.
♪ Hollywood 2 a.m. ♪
♪ Oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh ♪
♪ Questioning everything ♪
♪ Oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh ♪
A tooth tattoo in some cultures means...
Actually, I have no idea what it means until Alison said she chose it because she liked it and it's for biting.
Upper hand.
Nice.
♪ Get the vision ♪
♪ Get the vision ♪
♪ Get the vision ♪
♪ Come on ♪
♪ Get the vision ♪
♪ Get the vision ♪
♪ Get the vision ♪
♪ Come on ♪
I, on the other hand, gave this scorpion careful consideration after a less carefully considered number of tequilas.
Yeah?
That looks amazing.
- It bends, but...
- It's sinister.
- I like it.
- Totally sinister.
♪ Nothing is a color
I cross the desert ♪
♪ Nothing is alive ♪
♪ What does the black top know ♪
♪ That I have not cracked with my mind ♪
♪ Nothing is a color ♪
♪ Gray as the pill ♪
♪ Nobody cries ♪
I'm pretty proud of that.
That came out pretty good.
Thank you.
♪ I feel love ♪
♪ Every million miles ♪
♪ I feel love ♪
♪ Every once in a while ♪
♪ I feel love ♪
♪ Every million miles ♪
♪ I feel love ♪
♪ Every once in a while ♪
I'm still... I'm still so drunk.
A drink'll help.
- Man, good party.
- Yeah.
It was, like, the greatest.
As I was driving here, I just couldn't stop smiling.
Just remembering, like, the things I can remember, which is not all of it, but there's a timeline.
- What...
- You, yeah.
- Oh, my God.
- Seriously, I have bite marks.
No, no, no way.
- No, I do, I've got...
- Who bit you?
That's a cigarette.
That's a bite mark.
What's that?
Awesome.
That's a bruise.
What's that?
There's a timeline here, people.
- The last I was gonna get...
- Let's work it out.
I feel so complete.
And I was gonna wear that today, but I... -Oh, my goodness.
Nailed it.
That guy was wearing a tutu.
So I guess it could be worse this morning.
I mean, I could be...
- Wow, what's that?
- Ooh.
Bloody Mary.
Yeah.
Apparently we took some casualties at last night's house party.
But for every throbbing skull, every unremembered blunt force trauma, there is a cure: a Bloody Mary, a Mimosa, or both, should you prefer.
Pinewood Social.
Our friend Josh's place, where natural allies, alcohol, hangovers, and bowling coexist peacefully in an atmosphere of mutual respect.
Also food.
Tony, how many times do you eat a day?
No, because when I watch that show, I think about it.
I'm like, "Wow, you've had, like, seven meals" and it's only 1:00."
- Who's up?
- You're up first.
I'm up? Okay.
Yeah.
Oh.
Going well.
Not a promising beginning.
It can only get better.
I don't think he's American.
If there's any hustler, it would be I.J.
You know?
Yeah.
The unassuming guy who just happens to show up after being missing for a little while.
Right.
I can see that.
♪ So many promises, favors, and lies ♪
♪ Most of the town wears a good disguise ♪
That might have been the quickest gutter of the day.
♪ As the saying goes, it's not who you know ♪
♪ But it's who you blow that'll get you in the show ♪
♪ And if that's not the case ♪
♪ I hear you pay 'em ♪
♪ But I don't come easy ♪
♪ And I'm flat broke ♪
Oh!
♪ Maybe I'd be smarter ♪
♪ If I played dumb ♪
Oh, yes.
Yeah.
Oh!
♪ Now I know much better ♪
♪ Than to let that make me mad ♪
Over the line.
That's the one!
Yes!
Oh!
I was like... I was going, okay, get into character.
In a safer world, all of us here would be prohibited from hurling heavy objects in any direction given our sorry states and our general ineptness at this sport of kings.
But that's Nashville for you.
A welcoming place.
A forgiving one.
I feel right at home.
♪ When I first came here ♪
♪ The streets were paved with gold ♪
♪ And you can walk that road I've been told ♪
♪ But I won't put out or be controlled ♪
♪ I don't write the shit that gets bought and sold ♪
♪ Ask any man, he might know ♪
♪ Who used to live on Music Row ♪
♪ But that was then and this is now ♪
♪ And he told me ♪
♪ This town gets around ♪
♪ From what I've found ♪
♪ This town gets around ♪
